# **A Comprehensive Critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement and Reformed
Theology in Pierced for Our Transgressions**

Below is the Introduction (Section 1) of the paper titled *A Comprehensive
Critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement and Reformed Theology in Pierced for
Our Transgressions*, written at a biblical scholar and theologian level without
requiring knowledge of Greek or Hebrew. The text uses the Net Bible version 2
for scriptural references and maintains a scholarly tone suitable for a
theological and philosophical audience. I will pause before reaching any
character limit and prompt for continuation instructions.

## A Comprehensive Critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement and Reformed Theology in *Pierced for Our Transgressions*

### 1. Introduction: Reframing Atonement Theology

#### **1.1 The Multifaceted Nature of Atonement**

The doctrine of Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) posits that Jesus Christ’s
death on the cross functioned as a substitutionary punishment, bearing the wrath
of God owed to sinners and thus securing their forgiveness. In *Pierced for Our
Transgressions*, Steve Jeffery, Michael Ovey, and Andrew Sach assert that PSA
“stands at the heart of the atonement” (Jeffery et al., 2007, p. 33),
positioning it as the definitive lens through which Christ’s redemptive work
should be understood. Yet, this claim risks oversimplifying the atonement’s
complexity, marginalizing a broader spectrum of biblical imagery that reveals
its multidimensional nature. Scripture does not confine atonement to a singular,
punitive model but unfolds it through diverse metaphors, each highlighting
distinct facets of God’s saving action through Christ.

Consider the following biblical models of atonement, each rooted in specific
texts from the Net Bible:

-   **Christus Victor**: This perspective frames the cross as Christ’s triumph
    over cosmic evil. Colossians 2:15 declares, “Disarming the rulers and
    authorities, he has made a public disgrace of them, triumphing over them by
    the cross.” Here, atonement is a victorious act, dismantling oppressive
    powers rather than settling a legal debt.

-   **Reconciliation**: Emphasizing relational restoration, 2 Corinthians 5:19
    states, “In Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting
    people’s sins against them.” Forgiveness emerges as an act of healing,
    prioritizing renewed communion over punitive satisfaction.

-   **Ransom**: In Mark 10:45, Jesus describes his mission as giving “his life
    as a ransom for many,” evoking liberation from captivity—whether to sin,
    death, or evil forces—rather than an appeasement of divine anger.

-   **Theosis**: Drawing from 2 Peter 1:4, where believers are invited to
    “participate in the divine nature,” this model envisions atonement as a
    transformative union with God, transcending mere judicial clearance.

-   **Moral Influence**: 1 Peter 2:21-23 presents Christ’s suffering as an
    example, calling believers to emulate his endurance of injustice, suggesting
    an ethical dimension to atonement alongside its salvific role.

These models collectively challenge PSA’s asserted primacy, demonstrating that
Scripture resists confinement to a wrath-centric, transactional framework. By
elevating PSA above these alternatives, *Pierced for Our Transgressions* imposes
a restrictive hermeneutic that obscures the atonement’s full theological
richness.

#### **1.2 Purpose and Scope**

This paper undertakes a rigorous critique of PSA as articulated in *Pierced for
Our Transgressions*, examining its theological coherence, philosophical
underpinnings, and ethical implications. It contends that PSA’s legalistic
focus—rooted in the Reformed theological framework, including the TULIP
doctrines (Total Depravity, Unconditional Election, Limited Atonement,
Irresistible Grace, Perseverance of the Saints)—distorts the biblical portrayal
of atonement. In response, the critique advocates for models such as Christus
Victor, reconciliation, and theosis, which emphasize human free will, relational
renewal, and cosmic restoration over retributive justice. The scope encompasses
scriptural exegesis, historical theology, philosophical analysis, and ethical
reflection, aiming to construct a more holistic atonement theology that aligns
with the breadth of biblical revelation.

#### **1.3 Methodology**

The critique adopts a multifaceted methodology to dismantle PSA’s dominance and
propose alternatives:

-   **Scriptural Exegesis**: Utilizing the Net Bible version 2, the analysis
    engages translator notes and commentary to illuminate textual meanings,
    avoiding reliance on Greek or Hebrew expertise.

-   **Historical Analysis**: It traces PSA’s evolution from medieval
    satisfaction theory (e.g., Anselm) to its Reformation articulation,
    questioning its historical inevitability.

-   **Philosophical Critique**: The study interrogates PSA’s alignment with
    retributive justice theories and its implications for divine attributes like
    love and wrath, drawing on philosophical frameworks accessible to
    theologians.

-   **Ethical Evaluation**: Insights from feminist and liberation theology
    highlight PSA’s potential to glorify violence and neglect systemic
    injustice.

-   **Comparative Theology**: Perspectives from Eastern Orthodoxy (e.g.,
    theosis) and Anabaptist traditions (e.g., moral influence) contextualize PSA
    as a culturally contingent construct.

A particular emphasis lies in translation-specific debates, such as the
interpretation of Romans 3:25—whether “propitiation” (implying wrath
appeasement) or “expiation” (implying sin removal) better captures the text’s
intent—undermining PSA’s scriptural foundation.

**[Pause for Confirmation]**

I have completed the Introduction (Section 1), setting the stage for the
critique of PSA with an outline of its biblical alternatives, purpose, scope,
and methodology. Please let me know if you would like me to proceed with
**Section 2: Detailed Analysis of Penal Substitution**, starting at **2.1
Subject: "The doctrine of penal substitution"**, or if you have alternative
instructions based on the Table of Contents provided.

Below is the continuation of the academic paper critiquing Penal Substitutionary
Atonement (PSA) and Reformed theology, tailored for a biblical scholar and
theologian audience. This section corresponds to **Section 2.1: Subject: "The
doctrine of penal substitution"** from the provided Table of Contents. The
writing avoids technical Greek or Hebrew, uses the Net Bible version 2 for
scriptural references, and maintains a scholarly tone. It integrates
theological, philosophical, and scriptural analyses to challenge the arguments
in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* by Steve Jeffery, Michael Ovey, and Andrew
Sach (2007). I will pause before reaching any character limit and prompt for
continuation instructions.

### 2. Detailed Analysis of Penal Substitution: Core Components and Counterarguments

#### **2.1 Subject: "The doctrine of penal substitution"**

The doctrine of Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA), as articulated by
Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach, posits that “God gave himself in the person of his Son
to suffer instead of us the death, punishment and curse due to fallen humanity
as the penalty for sin” (2007, p. 21). This definition hinges on four
interrelated assertions: (1) human sin provokes divine wrath, (2) God’s justice
necessitates punishment, (3) Christ takes humanity’s place as a substitute, and
(4) his suffering appeases God’s wrath, thereby effecting salvation. While these
claims are ostensibly grounded in Scripture, their integration into PSA
introduces theological, exegetical, and logical difficulties that warrant
critical examination.

##### **2.1.1 In-Depth Description and Argument in Favor**

Advocates of PSA, including the authors of *Pierced for Our Transgressions*,
cite key biblical texts to substantiate their position. Romans 3:25 asserts,
“God publicly displayed him [Christ] as a satisfaction for sin by his blood
through faith” (Net Bible), with “satisfaction for sin” often rendered as
“propitiation,” suggesting the alleviation of divine anger. Similarly, Isaiah
53:5-6 states, “He was wounded because of our rebellious deeds, crushed because
of our sins… the Lord caused the sin of all of us to attack him” (Net Bible),
which proponents interpret as Christ absorbing the penalty owed by humanity.
Together, these passages are marshaled to depict Christ’s death as a
substitutionary act that fulfills divine justice.

Yet, a closer exegetical analysis reveals interpretive complexities. The Net
Bible’s translator note on Romans 3:25 indicates that the term translated as
“satisfaction for sin” (*hilastērion*) can also mean “expiation” (a cleansing of
sin) or “mercy seat” (the Old Testament site of God’s forgiving presence),
broadening the theological implications beyond a wrath-focused propitiation.
Likewise, in Isaiah 53:5, the term “chastisement” (Hebrew *mûsar*) can imply
corrective discipline rather than retributive punishment, as noted in the Net
Bible commentary. These alternative readings suggest that Christ’s suffering
might reflect solidarity with humanity or a restorative act, rather than a
strictly penal transaction.

Theologically, PSA’s reliance on divine wrath as a central motif raises
questions about its coherence with God’s revealed character. Scripture affirms
God’s displeasure with sin (e.g., Romans 1:18, “For the wrath of God is revealed
from heaven against all ungodliness”), but it equally emphasizes God’s mercy and
love. Ezekiel 33:11 declares, “I take no pleasure in the death of the wicked,
but rather that the wicked turn from his way and live” (Net Bible), portraying
divine justice as oriented toward redemption, not retribution. PSA’s framework,
by contrast, implies that God’s forgiveness is contingent upon punishment,
potentially subordinating divine freedom and love to a legalistic paradigm.

##### **2.1.2 Counterarguments from Seven Perspectives**

The hegemony of PSA is contested by a range of theological and exegetical
perspectives, each exposing its limitations and proposing alternative
understandings of atonement. These critiques collectively undermine the
assertion in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* that PSA is the definitive lens
for interpreting Christ’s work.

-   **General Critique**: PSA’s fixation on divine wrath distorts the biblical
    portrayal of God’s love. 1 John 4:8 states, “God is love” (Net Bible), with
    the Translator’s Note emphasizing that love constitutes God’s essence, not
    merely an attribute. By prioritizing a transactional justice over grace, PSA
    risks eclipsing the gospel’s relational core.

-   **Christus Victor**: This perspective interprets atonement as Christ’s
    triumph over evil powers, as seen in Colossians 2:15: “Disarming the rulers
    and authorities, he has made a public disgrace of them, triumphing over them
    by the cross” (Net Bible). The cross here is a victory, not a penalty
    payment, liberating humanity from cosmic oppression.

-   **Reconciliation**: Focusing on relational restoration, 2 Corinthians 5:19
    asserts, “In Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting
    people’s sins against them” (Net Bible). The Net Bible Commentary
    underscores that reconciliation heals fellowship, challenging PSA’s
    legalistic emphasis on punishment.

-   **Ransom**: In Mark 10:45, Jesus gives “his life as a ransom for many” (Net
    Bible). The Translator’s Note clarifies that “ransom” (*lytron*) denotes
    liberation from captivity, not a payment to appease God, resonating with
    early church views of redemption from sin or death.

-   **Patristic View**: Irenaeus’ recapitulation theory, drawing on Ephesians
    1:10, envisions Christ reversing Adam’s fall through obedience, restoring
    humanity holistically. This integrates Christ’s life, death, and
    resurrection, eschewing PSA’s narrow focus on penal substitution.

-   **Divine Council**: Psalm 82 depicts God judging a council of divine beings,
    with Translator’s Notes hinting at a cosmic rebellion context. This situates
    sin within a broader supernatural narrative, which PSA’s human-centric
    punitive model overlooks.

-   **Theosis**: 2 Peter 1:4 invites believers to “participate in the divine
    nature” (Net Bible), emphasizing deification as atonement’s goal. Eastern
    Orthodox theology, exemplified by Athanasius, frames Christ’s work as
    enabling union with God, not satisfying wrath.

These diverse perspectives illustrate that PSA’s wrath-driven, punitive
interpretation is neither exhaustive nor biblically mandated. By marginalizing
these alternatives, *Pierced for Our Transgressions* offers a theologically
constrained view of atonement, neglecting the richness of Scripture’s atonement
imagery.

**[Pause for Confirmation]**

I have completed **Section 2.1: Subject: "The doctrine of penal substitution"**,
encompassing both the in-depth description and counterarguments from seven
perspectives. The analysis employs Net Bible references, translator notes, and
theological insights suitable for a scholarly audience without requiring Greek
or Hebrew expertise. Please instruct me whether to proceed to **Section 2.2:
Predicate: "States that God gave himself"** or provide alternative guidance
based on the Table of Contents.

Below is the response to your query, written at a biblical scholar and
theologian level, critiquing Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) as requested
for **Section 2.2: Predicate: "States that God gave himself"**. This section
uses the Net Bible version 2 for scriptural references, avoids requiring
knowledge of Greek or Hebrew, and integrates theological, philosophical, and
scriptural insights to challenge PSA while maintaining a scholarly tone. I will
pause before reaching any character limit and prompt for continuation.

#### **2.2 Predicate: "States that God gave himself"**

The doctrine of Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) asserts that God, in the
person of his Son, offered himself as a sacrifice to bear the punishment
humanity deserved. In *Pierced for Our Transgressions*, Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach
(2007) root this claim in John 3:16: “For this is the way God loved the world:
He gave his one and only Son” (Net Bible), interpreting this “giving” as God’s
self-sacrifice to appease divine wrath (p. 35). However, this punitive framework
is not inherent in the text and can be contested by alternative readings that
prioritize divine love and initiative, thus undermining a core premise of PSA.

##### **2.2.1 In-Depth Description and Argument in Favor**

Advocates of PSA argue that John 3:16 reveals a Trinitarian act of
substitutionary sacrifice, where the Father “gave” the Son to endure wrath on
humanity’s behalf, balancing divine justice and love. This interpretation finds
further support in Romans 8:32: “He who did not spare his own Son but gave him
up for us all” (Net Bible), which they read as God delivering the Son to
punishment. For PSA proponents, this self-giving is the mechanism by which God
satisfies the legal demands of sin, with the Son acting as humanity’s
substitute.

Yet, this wrath-focused lens is not the only plausible reading. The Net Bible’s
Translator’s Note on John 3:16 suggests that “gave” can imply a gift of love
rather than a sacrificial offering to appease wrath, emphasizing God’s salvific
initiative over atonement mechanics. Likewise, Romans 8:32, when paired with
Romans 8:31 (“If God is for us, who can be against us?”), highlights proactive
grace rather than a transactional exchange. Theologically, PSA’s framing of God
“giving himself” risks implying a transactional dynamic within the Trinity,
potentially suggesting discord or subordination—a tension absent in models like
*Christus Victor* (emphasizing triumph over evil) or *theosis* (focusing on
human participation in divine nature).

##### **2.2.2 Counterarguments from Seven Perspectives**

PSA’s punitive interpretation of divine self-giving faces robust challenges from
multiple theological and exegetical perspectives, each offering a more coherent
and biblically grounded alternative.

-   **General Critique**: By casting divine self-giving as a wrath-satisfying
    act, PSA risks modalism, portraying the Father and Son as distinct actors in
    a transactional drama. This undermines Trinitarian unity, as affirmed in
    John 10:30: “I and the Father are one” (Net Bible), where the commentary
    stresses a shared essence and purpose, not a punitive division.

-   **Christus Victor**: This model views God’s self-giving as a cosmic victory
    over evil powers. John 12:31 states, “Now is the judgment of this world; now
    the ruler of this world will be driven out” (Net Bible), with the
    Translator’s Note linking this to Christ’s crucifixion as a triumph, not an
    appeasement of wrath.

-   **Reconciliation**: Romans 5:8 asserts, “God demonstrates his own love for
    us, in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us” (Net Bible).
    The commentary emphasizes love as the motive, aiming to heal relational
    estrangement rather than satisfy a legal penalty.

-   **Ransom**: In 1 Timothy 2:6, Christ “gave himself as a ransom for all” (Net
    Bible). The Translator’s Note clarifies that “ransom” suggests liberation
    from captivity—sin or death—rather than a payment to God, aligning with
    early church redemption motifs.

-   **Patristic View**: Athanasius, in *On the Incarnation*, frames God’s
    self-giving through the incarnation as enabling human deification: “He
    became incarnate that we might become divine” (ch. 54). This relational
    focus contrasts sharply with PSA’s penal emphasis.

-   **Divine Council**: Ephesians 1:21-22 depicts Christ exalted “far above
    every ruler and authority” (Net Bible), with the commentary noting this as
    God’s sovereign reclamation of creation. Divine self-giving here asserts
    cosmic authority, not a wrath-driven sacrifice.

-   **Theosis**: Jesus prays in John 17:21, “That they will all be one, just as
    you, Father, are in me and I am in you” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note
    underscores Trinitarian indwelling, which *theosis* extends to believers
    through Christ’s incarnational gift, not punitive suffering.

These perspectives collectively reveal that PSA’s wrath-centric reading of
divine self-giving is neither biblically mandated nor theologically necessary.
Alternatives emphasizing love, liberation, and relational restoration better
align with Scripture’s broader narrative.

**[Pause for Confirmation]**

I have completed **Section 2.2: Predicate: "States that God gave himself"**,
including both the in-depth description and counterarguments from seven
perspectives. This analysis uses Net Bible references, integrates translator
notes, and remains accessible to biblical scholars and theologians without
requiring Greek or Hebrew expertise. Please instruct me whether to proceed to
**Section 2.3: Means: "In the person of his Son"** or provide alternative
guidance based on the Table of Contents.

Below is **Section 2.3: Means: "In the person of his Son"** from the academic
paper critiquing Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) and Reformed theology, as
requested. This section is crafted for biblical scholars and theologians, uses
the Net Bible version 2 for scriptural references, and avoids requiring
knowledge of Greek or Hebrew. It integrates theological, philosophical, and
exegetical insights to challenge PSA while maintaining a scholarly tone. I will
pause before reaching any character limit and prompt for continuation.

#### **2.3 Means: "In the person of his Son"**

The doctrine of Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA), as articulated in
*Pierced for Our Transgressions* by Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach (2007), posits that
God provided the means of atonement through the incarnation of his Son, Jesus
Christ, who assumed human nature to serve as a substitute bearing divine
punishment for humanity’s sins. This section examines PSA’s interpretation of
the incarnation, its scriptural basis, and its theological implications, before
presenting counterarguments from diverse perspectives that reveal its
limitations.

##### **2.3.1 In-Depth Description and Argument in Favor**

Proponents of PSA argue that the incarnation—God’s Son taking on human flesh—was
an essential mechanism for Christ to act as humanity’s penal substitute. They
anchor this claim in Hebrews 2:14-17, which states: “Therefore, since the
children share in flesh and blood, he likewise shared in their humanity… to make
atonement for the sins of the people” (Net Bible). Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach
interpret this passage as indicating that Christ’s assumption of human nature
enabled him to face God’s wrath in humanity’s stead, culminating in his
sacrificial death. Similarly, Galatians 4:4-5 is cited: “When the appropriate
time had come, God sent out his Son, born of a woman, born under the law, to
redeem those under the law” (Net Bible). The phrase “born under the law” is
taken to mean that Christ subjected himself to the law’s curse, as reinforced by
Galatians 3:13: “Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a
curse for us” (Net Bible). This, they assert, establishes the incarnation as the
necessary means for substitutionary punishment.

However, the Net Bible’s Translator’s Note on Galatians 4:4 clarifies that “born
under the law” underscores Christ’s full participation in human experience and
submission to God’s redemptive plan, not exclusively his role as a recipient of
divine wrath. Likewise, the commentary on Hebrews 2:17 emphasizes Christ’s role
as a “merciful and faithful high priest,” suggesting a mediatorial function
aimed at reconciliation rather than solely punishment. These exegetical nuances
question PSA’s narrow focus on penal substitution. Theologically, PSA’s emphasis
on the incarnation as a prerequisite for punishment risks reducing a profound
mystery—God becoming human—to a utilitarian step in a legal transaction,
overshadowing its broader significance in salvation history.

##### **2.3.2 Counterarguments from Seven Perspectives**

The punitive interpretation of the incarnation in PSA is neither scripturally
mandated nor theologically exhaustive. Alternative perspectives, grounded in
Scripture and tradition, highlight solidarity, victory, and deification as
central to Christ’s incarnate mission, exposing PSA’s shortcomings.

-   **General Critique**: PSA’s substitutionary model raises ethical concerns by
    implying divine violence—punishing an innocent (Christ) for the guilty. This
    portrayal contrasts with models like moral influence, which see the
    incarnation as an ethical exemplar. 1 Peter 2:21 states, “Christ suffered
    for you, leaving an example for you to follow” (Net Bible), prioritizing his
    life as a guide over his death as a penalty.

-   **Christus Victor**: This view frames the incarnation as God’s tactical
    entry into human existence to triumph over evil. 1 John 3:8 declares, “The
    reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the works of the devil” (Net
    Bible), with the Translator’s Note connecting this to dismantling evil’s
    dominion, not appeasing divine wrath.

-   **Reconciliation**: Hebrews 4:15 presents Christ as “one who has been
    tempted in every way just as we are, yet without sin” (Net Bible). The
    commentary highlights his solidarity with humanity, enabling a mediatorial
    role that fosters reconciliation through shared experience, not
    substitutionary suffering.

-   **Ransom**: Hebrews 2:14 notes that Christ “shared in flesh and blood… so
    that through death he could destroy the one who holds the power of death”
    (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note explains “destroy” as rendering
    powerless, aligning the incarnation with liberation from death’s hold rather
    than satisfaction of divine justice.

-   **Patristic View**: Irenaeus’ recapitulation theory, echoed in Ephesians
    1:10, sees the incarnation as Christ renewing humanity through obedience
    across his entire life, not merely his death. This holistic renewal
    contrasts with PSA’s focus on a single punitive act.

-   **Divine Council**: Revelation 19:11 portrays Christ as “Faithful and True,
    and in righteousness he judges and makes war” (Net Bible). The Translator’s
    Note underscores his eschatological role in cosmic restoration, broadening
    the incarnation’s purpose beyond individual substitution.

-   **Theosis**: Colossians 1:19 states, “For God was pleased to have all his
    fullness dwell in the Son” (Net Bible). The commentary ties this to
    deification, with Christ’s humanity bridging humanity to divine
    participation, a purpose far exceeding PSA’s punitive scope.

These seven perspectives collectively demonstrate that PSA’s interpretation of
the incarnation as a means for penal substitution is a reductive lens.
Alternative models—such as *Christus Victor*, *reconciliation*, and
*theosis*—offer more comprehensive accounts of Christ’s incarnate mission,
integrating his life, death, and resurrection into a unified salvific narrative.

**[Pause for Confirmation]**

I have completed **Section 2.3: Means: "In the person of his Son"**, providing a
detailed critique suitable for biblical scholars and theologians, with Net Bible
references and theological depth. Please instruct me whether to proceed to
**Section 2.4: Purpose/Action: "To suffer instead of us"** or provide
alternative guidance based on the Table of Contents.

Below is my response to your query, written at a biblical scholar and theologian
level without requiring Greek or Hebrew expertise. I have crafted a detailed
analysis of **Section 2.4: Purpose/Action: "To suffer instead of us"** from the
provided Table of Contents, integrating scriptural exegesis (using the Net Bible
version 2), theological critique, and ethical evaluation. This section critiques
the Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) model as presented in *Pierced for Our
Transgressions* by Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach (2007), focusing on the claim that
Christ’s suffering was a substitutionary punishment for humanity’s sins. I will
pause before reaching any character limit and prompt for continuation.

#### **2.4 Purpose/Action: "To suffer instead of us"**

The doctrine of Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) posits that the central
purpose of Christ’s suffering and death was to bear divine punishment in
humanity’s stead, satisfying God’s justice and averting wrath from sinners. In
*Pierced for Our Transgressions*, Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach argue that this
substitutionary suffering is foundational to atonement theology, grounding their
claim in 1 Peter 2:24: “He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree, that
we may cease from sinning and live for righteousness. By his wounds you were
healed” (Net Bible). They assert that this verse demonstrates Christ enduring
the punitive consequences of sin as a substitute for humanity (p. 98). However,
this interpretation is neither biblically inevitable nor theologically
unassailable. A careful analysis reveals alternative readings and raises
significant challenges to PSA’s punitive framework.

##### **2.4.1 In-Depth Description and Argument in Favor**

Advocates of PSA contend that Christ’s suffering fulfills a legal requirement,
whereby God’s righteousness demands punishment for sin, and Christ steps in as
humanity’s substitute. They frequently cite Isaiah 53:5: “He was wounded because
of our rebellious deeds, crushed because of our sins; he endured punishment that
made us well; because of his wounds we have been healed” (Net Bible). The phrase
“he endured punishment” is pivotal, interpreted as Christ absorbing divine wrath
to secure human salvation. Similarly, 2 Corinthians 5:21 is marshaled as
evidence: “God made the one who did not know sin to be sin for us, so that in
him we would become the righteousness of God” (Net Bible). PSA proponents read
this as Christ taking on human guilt, enabling a forensic transfer of
righteousness to believers.

Yet, these texts allow for broader interpretations. The Net Bible’s Translator’s
Note on 1 Peter 2:24 suggests that “bore our sins” echoes the scapegoat ritual
of Leviticus 16, where sins are carried away rather than punished in a
retributive sense. In Isaiah 53:5, the Hebrew term translated “punishment”
(*mûsar*) can mean “discipline” or “instruction,” not solely a judicial penalty,
as the Translator’s Note clarifies. For 2 Corinthians 5:21, the note proposes
that “to be sin” might signify Christ as a “sin offering,” aligning with
sacrificial atonement imagery rather than a legal substitution. These
alternative readings undermine PSA’s insistence on a strictly punitive purpose
for Christ’s suffering.

Theologically, PSA’s focus on substitutionary punishment suggests that God’s
forgiveness hinges on violence, a premise that jars with biblical depictions of
divine mercy. Hosea 6:6 states, “I desire mercy, not sacrifice” (Net Bible),
with the accompanying commentary highlighting God’s priority of relational
restoration over ritual satisfaction. This invites a reconsideration of Christ’s
suffering as an act of love, solidarity, or victory rather than a transactional
penalty.

##### **2.4.2 Counterarguments from Seven Perspectives**

The claim that Christ suffered “instead of us” in a punitive sense faces robust
challenges from diverse theological and scriptural angles. Below, seven
perspectives critique PSA’s framework, offering richer alternatives to its
substitutionary focus.

-   **General Critique**: PSA’s punitive emphasis casts God as a deity whose
    justice necessitates violence, clashing with the biblical portrayal of
    unmerited grace. Luke 15:20 illustrates this in the parable of the prodigal
    son, where the father runs to embrace his wayward child without requiring
    punishment, suggesting forgiveness flows from love, not retribution.

-   **Christus Victor**: Hebrews 2:10 frames Christ’s suffering as a means to
    perfection and leadership: “It was fitting for him… to make the pioneer of
    their salvation perfect through sufferings” (Net Bible). The Translator’s
    Note connects this to Christ’s triumph over evil, not a penal exchange,
    emphasizing victory as the purpose of his passion.

-   **Reconciliation**: Romans 8:17 invites believers to “suffer with [Christ]
    so we may also be glorified with him” (Net Bible). The commentary
    underscores a participatory model, where Christ’s suffering unites humanity
    to God, contrasting with PSA’s transactional substitution.

-   **Ransom**: In Matthew 20:28, Jesus declares he came “to give his life as a
    ransom for many” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note explains “ransom” as
    liberation, not a payment to appease God, resonating with early church views
    of redemption from sin’s bondage rather than wrath.

-   **Patristic View**: Athanasius, in *On the Incarnation* (ch. 25), asserts
    that Christ’s suffering and death overcame mortality: “By death He destroyed
    death.” This casts suffering as a transformative act defeating evil, not a
    legal satisfaction of divine anger.

-   **Divine Council**: Ephesians 6:12 situates suffering within a cosmic
    conflict: “Our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the
    rulers” (Net Bible). Christ’s passion, then, engages this broader battle,
    transcending a narrow penal focus on human sin.

-   **Theosis**: Philippians 3:10 expresses Paul’s longing to “know [Christ] and
    the power of his resurrection and the fellowship of his sufferings” (Net
    Bible). The Translator’s Note links this to a transformative sharing in
    Christ’s life, pointing to deification rather than substitutionary
    punishment.

These perspectives collectively reveal that PSA’s substitutionary suffering is
not the sole or most compelling lens for understanding Christ’s passion. Models
like *Christus Victor*, *reconciliation*, and *theosis* integrate his suffering
into narratives of triumph, healing, and divine communion, offering a more
holistic atonement theology.

**[Pause for Confirmation]**

I have completed **Section 2.4: Purpose/Action: "To suffer instead of us"**,
providing a scholarly critique of PSA with Net Bible references, translator
notes, and theological depth. Please instruct me whether to proceed to **Section
2.5: Object of Suffering: "The death, punishment, and curse"** or provide
alternative guidance based on the Table of Contents.

Below is **Section 2.5: Object of Suffering: "The death, punishment, and
curse"** from an academic paper critiquing Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA)
and Reformed theology, as presented in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* by
Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach (2007). Written for biblical scholars and theologians,
this section uses the Net Bible version 2 for scriptural references and avoids
requiring knowledge of Greek or Hebrew. It provides a detailed analysis of PSA’s
focus on Christ’s suffering, followed by counterarguments from multiple
theological perspectives.

#### **2.5 Object of Suffering: "The death, punishment, and curse"**

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) posits that the object of Christ’s
suffering—death, punishment, and curse—represents the consequences of human sin
that Christ endured as a substitute. In *Pierced for Our Transgressions*,
Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach (2007) emphasize Galatians 3:13—“Christ redeemed us from
the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us” (Net Bible)—to argue that
Christ’s crucifixion satisfied divine justice by bearing these penalties (p.
98). This section critiques PSA’s punitive emphasis, highlighting its dependence
on specific scriptural interpretations and its tension with broader theological
frameworks.

##### **2.5.1 In-Depth Description and Argument in Favor**

PSA proponents assert that Christ’s suffering comprised three key elements:
**death** as the penalty for sin (Romans 6:23, “The payoff of sin is death,” Net
Bible), **punishment** as the expression of divine wrath, and **curse** as the
legal consequence of violating God’s law (Galatians 3:13). Deuteronomy 21:23,
linked to Galatians 3:13, declares, “Anyone hung on a tree is cursed by God”
(Net Bible), which PSA interprets as Christ absorbing this curse on the cross.
Together, these elements frame Christ’s suffering as a judicial act, where
divine holiness demands retribution for sin, and Christ’s death fulfills this
requirement.

Translation choices bolster PSA’s argument. In Galatians 3:13, both the ESV and
NIV render the phrase as “becoming a curse for us,” suggesting a direct
substitution. However, the Net Bible’s Translator’s Note offers nuance: the term
“curse” can imply either a state of being cursed or the effects of a curse,
potentially shifting the focus from divine punishment to the law’s consequences.
Similarly, in Romans 6:23, “death” is clarified as encompassing physical and
spiritual separation from God, not solely a punitive outcome. These subtleties
indicate that PSA’s interpretation may amplify a penal reading beyond the text’s
intent, opening space for alternative understandings.

Theologically, PSA frames God’s justice as requiring violence to address sin, a
view that aligns with Reformed theology’s emphasis on divine wrath. Yet, this
risks overshadowing mercy, as seen in Micah 7:18: “Who is a God like you, who
pardons sin and forgives transgression?” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note
underscores God’s mercy as a defining trait, challenging the necessity of
punitive suffering.

##### **2.5.2 Counterarguments from Seven Perspectives**

PSA’s focus on death, punishment, and curse is neither the sole nor the most
comprehensive interpretation of Christ’s suffering. Seven theological
perspectives reveal its limitations, offering alternative lenses that prioritize
victory, restoration, and transformation.

-   **General Critique**: PSA’s punitive lens suggests God is constrained by
    retributive justice, diminishing divine freedom and mercy. Psalm 103:10
    counters this: “He does not deal with us as our sins deserve; he does not
    repay us as our misdeeds deserve” (Net Bible), emphasizing grace over
    penalty.

-   **Christus Victor**: This view sees Christ’s death as a triumph over sin and
    death, not a substitutionary punishment. 1 Corinthians 15:54-55 declares,
    “Death has been swallowed up in victory… where is your sting, O death?” (Net
    Bible), with the Translator’s Note tying this to resurrection, not
    retribution.

-   **Reconciliation**: Colossians 1:20 states that Christ reconciled “all
    things to himself… by making peace through the blood of his cross” (Net
    Bible). The commentary highlights cosmic restoration, portraying suffering
    as a peacemaking act, not a legal transaction.

-   **Ransom**: Hebrews 2:15 describes Christ freeing “those who were held in
    slavery all their lives by their fear of death” (Net Bible). The
    Translator’s Note frames this as liberation from death’s dominion, not a
    payment to appease God.

-   **Patristic View**: Augustine (*City of God*, Book X, ch. 6) treats death as
    a consequence of sin, not a divine penalty requiring satisfaction. Christ’s
    suffering thus reverses this consequence, aligning with restoration rather
    than punishment.

-   **Divine Council**: Genesis 3:17—“Cursed is the ground because of you” (Net
    Bible)—depicts the curse as a cosmic disruption. The Translator’s Note
    suggests Christ’s suffering restores creation, not absorbs a judicial curse.

-   **Theosis**: John 11:25 presents Christ as “the resurrection and the life”
    (Net Bible), with the commentary emphasizing eternal life. Suffering becomes
    a transformative journey, not a punitive endpoint, enabling participation in
    divine nature.

These perspectives collectively demonstrate that PSA’s emphasis on death,
punishment, and curse oversimplifies Christ’s suffering. Models like *Christus
Victor*, *reconciliation*, and *theosis* offer richer interpretations,
integrating suffering into narratives of cosmic renewal and relational healing.

**[Pause for Continuation]**

I have completed **Section 2.5: Object of Suffering: "The death, punishment, and
curse"**, providing a scholarly critique of PSA with Net Bible references and
theological depth. Based on your instructions and the Table of Contents, please
confirm whether I should proceed to **Section 2.6: Recipient/Context: "Due to
fallen humanity"** or provide alternative guidance.

Below is **Section 2.6: Recipient/Context: "Due to fallen humanity"** from the
academic paper critiquing Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) and Reformed
theology, as outlined in the Table of Contents from *A Comprehensive Critique of
Penal Substitutionary Atonement and Reformed Theology in Pierced for Our
Transgressions*. Written at a biblical scholar and theologian level, this
section uses the Net Bible version 2 for scriptural references and requires no
knowledge of Greek or Hebrew. It provides a detailed analysis of PSA’s reliance
on the concept of fallen humanity, supported by scripture, followed by
counterarguments from seven theological perspectives. The writing is scholarly,
integrating theological, exegetical, and philosophical insights, and pauses
before reaching any character limit to prompt for continuation.

#### **2.6 Recipient/Context: "Due to fallen humanity"**

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) posits that humanity’s fall into sin
created a condition of total moral and spiritual incapacity, necessitating a
divine substitute—Jesus Christ—to bear the punishment for human transgressions.
In *Pierced for Our Transgressions*, Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach (2007) anchor this
argument in Romans 5:12-19, asserting that Adam’s sin plunged humanity into
collective guilt, which Christ’s substitutionary death rectifies (p. 143). This
section examines PSA’s interpretation of the fall, critiques its theological and
scriptural foundations, and presents alternative perspectives that challenge its
punitive framework.

##### **2.6.1 In-Depth Description and Argument in Favor**

At the heart of PSA lies the claim that the fall rendered humanity incapable of
self-atonement due to a state of Total Depravity, a cornerstone of Reformed
theology. Proponents cite Romans 5:12: “Therefore, just as sin entered the world
through one man, and death through sin, and so death spread to all people
because all sinned” (Net Bible). This verse establishes the universal scope of
sin’s consequences, with death as both physical and spiritual separation from
God. PSA interprets Romans 5:18-19 as the solution: “Consequently, just as
condemnation for all people came through one transgression, so too through the
one righteous act came righteousness leading to life for all people. For just as
through the disobedience of the one man many were made sinners, so also through
the obedience of the one man many will be made righteous” (Net Bible). Christ’s
“righteous act”—his death—is seen as substitutionary, absorbing divine wrath to
satisfy justice.

The Net Bible’s Translator’s Note on Romans 5:12 offers flexibility in
interpretation: “because all sinned” may refer to individual acts or
participation in Adam’s sin, supporting PSA’s view of inherited guilt but also
opening alternative readings. The commentary on Romans 5:18 notes that
“righteousness leading to life” emphasizes restoration, suggesting a purpose
beyond legal satisfaction. PSA aligns this with Total Depravity, asserting that
humanity’s fallen nature leaves us helpless, requiring divine intervention.
However, this raises questions about human agency, as Ezekiel 18:20—“The person
who sins is the one who will die” (Net Bible)—implies individual responsibility,
potentially at odds with PSA’s collective guilt framework.

##### **2.6.2 Counterarguments from Seven Perspectives**

PSA’s reliance on the fall as necessitating substitutionary punishment is
contested by diverse theological models, each offering distinct interpretations
of humanity’s fallen state and Christ’s redemptive work. These perspectives
reveal PSA’s punitive focus as neither biblically inevitable nor theologically
comprehensive.

-   **General Critique**: PSA’s depiction of Total Depravity may exaggerate
    human incapacity, clashing with scriptures affirming moral agency.
    Deuteronomy 30:19 states, “Choose life so that you and your descendants may
    live” (Net Bible), suggesting humans retain the ability to respond to God’s
    grace, undermining PSA’s deterministic view of the fall.

-   **Christus Victor**: This model views the fall as part of a cosmic
    rebellion, not merely individual guilt. Ephesians 6:12 declares, “Our
    struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers” (Net
    Bible), with the Translator’s Note linking this to supernatural powers.
    Christ’s atonement achieves victory over these forces, reframing the fall’s
    context beyond personal sin.

-   **Reconciliation**: Emphasizing relational rupture over legal penalty,
    Romans 5:10 notes, “While we were enemies, we were reconciled to God through
    the death of his Son” (Net Bible). The commentary highlights reconciliation
    as restoring fellowship, shifting the focus from punishment to healing—a
    broader lens on humanity’s fallenness.

-   **Ransom**: This perspective sees the fall as enslavement, not just guilt.
    Romans 6:6 states, “Our old man was crucified with him so that the body of
    sin would no longer dominate us, so that we would no longer be enslaved to
    sin” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note frames atonement as liberation,
    offering a narrative of freedom rather than substitutionary payment.

-   **Patristic View**: Eastern theology, exemplified by Athanasius in *On the
    Incarnation*, interprets the fall as introducing mortality rather than
    inherited guilt. 1 Corinthians 15:22 affirms, “Just as in Adam all die, so
    also in Christ all will be made alive” (Net Bible), casting Christ’s work as
    overcoming death and restoring incorruption, not satisfying wrath.

-   **Divine Council**: Genesis 6:1-4 suggests divine beings contributed to
    humanity’s corruption, with the Translator’s Note proposing a cosmic
    rebellion. This widens the fall’s scope beyond human action, framing
    atonement as addressing supernatural disorder, not solely individual
    punishment.

-   **Theosis**: Rooted in Genesis 1:26—“Let us make humankind in our image”
    (Net Bible)—this view sees the fall as marring divine likeness. 2 Peter 1:4
    invites believers to “participate in the divine nature” (Net Bible),
    presenting atonement as restoring communion with God, not merely absolving
    guilt.

These seven perspectives collectively demonstrate that PSA’s interpretation of
fallen humanity as requiring substitutionary atonement is not exhaustive. Models
like *Christus Victor*, *reconciliation*, and *theosis* integrate the fall into
narratives of cosmic triumph, relational renewal, and transformative
restoration, offering richer alternatives to PSA’s legalistic focus.

**[Pause for Continuation]**

I have completed **Section 2.6: Recipient/Context: "Due to fallen humanity"**,
providing a scholarly critique of PSA with Net Bible references and theological
depth. Based on your Table of Contents and instructions, please confirm whether
I should proceed to **Section 2.7: Reason: "As the penalty for sin"** or provide
alternative guidance.

Below is **Section 2.7: Reason: "As the penalty for sin"** from an academic
paper titled *A Comprehensive Critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement and
Reformed Theology in Pierced for Our Transgressions*. This section is written at
a biblical scholar and theologian level, using the Net Bible version 2 for
scriptural references, and does not require knowledge of Greek or Hebrew. It
provides a detailed analysis of Penal Substitutionary Atonement’s (PSA) claim
that Christ’s death satisfies a legal penalty for sin, as argued in *Pierced for
Our Transgressions* by Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach (2007), followed by
counterarguments from seven theological perspectives. The tone is scholarly,
accessible, and integrates scriptural exegesis, theological critique, and
ethical evaluation.

#### **2.7 Reason: "As the penalty for sin"**

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) posits that Christ’s death functions as
the legal penalty for humanity’s sin, satisfying divine justice and averting
God’s wrath. In *Pierced for Our Transgressions*, Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach (2007)
anchor this claim in Romans 6:23: “For the payoff of sin is death, but the gift
of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord” (Net Bible). They argue that
this verse establishes death as the judicial consequence of sin, with Christ’s
crucifixion serving as the substitutionary payment that fulfills this penalty
(p. 142). This section examines PSA’s legalistic framework, scrutinizing its
scriptural foundation and theological implications, before presenting
counterarguments from seven perspectives that challenge its emphasis on punitive
justice.

##### **2.7.1 In-Depth Description and Argument in Favor**

PSA proponents assert that sin incurs a legal debt, with death as its mandated
penalty. Central to their argument is Romans 6:23: “For the payoff of sin is
death” (Net Bible), interpreted as the judicial wage earned by human
disobedience. The Net Bible’s Translator’s Note explains that “payoff” reflects
a transactional consequence, akin to a soldier’s wages, reinforcing PSA’s view
of Christ’s death as a substitutionary fulfillment of this debt. Supporting
texts include Galatians 3:13—“Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by
becoming a curse for us” (Net Bible)—and Isaiah 53:5—“He was wounded because of
our rebellious deeds” (Net Bible)—both cited to emphasize Christ’s role as
bearing humanity’s punishment.

Translation choices, however, introduce nuance. The ESV’s rendering of Romans
6:23 as “the wages of sin is death” amplifies a legalistic tone, while the Net
Bible’s “payoff” suggests a broader outcome, not strictly punitive. The
Translator’s Note on Isaiah 53:5 notes that “wounded” conveys vicarious
suffering, but its penal nature is not explicit, allowing for alternative
interpretations. Theologically, PSA’s focus on penalty risks oversimplifying
atonement as a courtroom transaction, potentially sidelining God’s relational
intent. Ezekiel 18:32—“I take no pleasure in the death of anyone” (Net
Bible)—further complicates the idea that divine justice inherently demands death
as retribution, hinting at a tension between punishment and mercy.

##### **2.7.2 Counterarguments from Seven Perspectives**

PSA’s claim that Christ’s death serves as a legal penalty for sin is not the
only, nor necessarily the most robust, interpretation of atonement. Seven
theological perspectives offer alternative frameworks, emphasizing victory,
reconciliation, and transformation over judicial satisfaction.

-   **General Critique**: PSA’s legalistic lens anthropomorphizes divine
    justice, mirroring human retributive systems and clashing with God’s mercy.
    Hosea 6:6 states, “I desire mercy, not sacrifice” (Net Bible), with the
    Translator’s Note highlighting God’s priority of relational fidelity over
    transactional appeasement, undermining PSA’s punitive foundation.

-   **Christus Victor**: This model views atonement as Christ’s triumph over
    evil powers, not a legal payment. John 16:11—“The ruler of this world has
    been condemned” (Net Bible)—supported by the Translator’s Note linking this
    to Satan’s defeat, reframes sin’s consequence as enslavement rather than a
    judicial debt.

-   **Reconciliation**: Atonement heals relational estrangement, not satisfies a
    penalty. Ephesians 2:16 notes that Christ “reconciled both [Jews and
    Gentiles] in one body to God through the cross” (Net Bible), with commentary
    emphasizing unity over legal resolution.

-   **Ransom**: Christ’s death liberates humanity from sin’s dominion, not pays
    a debt to God. Galatians 5:1—“For freedom Christ has set us free” (Net
    Bible)—and its Translator’s Note present atonement as emancipation, echoing
    early church redemption themes.

-   **Patristic View**: Early theologians like Athanasius saw sin’s penalty as
    corruption, not wrath. In *On the Incarnation* (ch. 9), Christ’s death
    overcomes this corruption, as in 1 Corinthians 15:22: “Just as in Adam all
    die, so also in Christ all will be made alive” (Net Bible).

-   **Divine Council**: Sin is part of a cosmic rebellion, per Deuteronomy
    32:8-9 (Net Bible), with the Translator’s Note referencing divine beings.
    Atonement addresses this broader disorder, not merely human penalty.

-   **Theosis**: Atonement removes obstacles to divine union, not satisfies
    wrath. 1 John 3:2—“We will be like him, because we will see him just as he
    is” (Net Bible)—ties salvation to transformation, per the Translator’s Note.

These perspectives collectively demonstrate that PSA’s punitive focus is neither
exhaustive nor definitive. Alternatives like *Christus Victor*,
*reconciliation*, and *theosis* weave atonement into narratives of liberation,
healing, and deification, offering more holistic theological insights.

This completes **Section 2.7: Reason: "As the penalty for sin"**, providing a
thorough critique of PSA with scriptural support and theological depth. I have
stayed within the character limit and will now pause to prompt for continuation.

**[Pause for Confirmation]**  
Would you like me to proceed to **Section 2.8: Outcome: "Providing
forgiveness"**, or do you have alternative instructions? Please advise based on
the Table of Contents or other preferences.

Below is a scholarly response to your query, written at a biblical scholar and
theologian level without requiring knowledge of Greek or Hebrew. It corresponds
to **Section 2.8: Outcome: "Providing forgiveness"** from the Table of Contents
you provided, offering a detailed critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement
(PSA) as presented in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* by Jeffery, Ovey, and
Sach (2007). Scriptural references use the Net Bible version 2, and the analysis
integrates exegesis, theological critique, and alternative perspectives. I will
pause before reaching any character limit and prompt you for further
instructions.

#### **2.8 Outcome: "Providing forgiveness"**

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) asserts that forgiveness of human sin is
secured through Christ’s substitutionary death, which satisfies divine justice
and allows God to pardon sinners without compromising His holiness. In *Pierced
for Our Transgressions*, Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach (2007) anchor this claim in 1
John 1:9: “But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous, forgiving
us our sins and cleansing us from all unrighteousness” (Net Bible). They argue
that God’s righteousness in forgiving is contingent upon Christ’s prior payment
of sin’s penalty (p. 142). This section critically examines PSA’s transactional
understanding of forgiveness, evaluates its scriptural and theological
foundations, and contrasts it with seven alternative perspectives that frame
forgiveness as a non-punitive act of grace, liberation, or transformation.

##### **2.8.1 In-Depth Description and Argument in Favor**

Proponents of PSA contend that forgiveness is not an arbitrary or gratuitous
divine act but one that requires the satisfaction of God’s justice. In their
view, 1 John 1:9 ties God’s faithfulness and righteousness to forgiveness,
implying that Christ’s death on the cross serves as the necessary mechanism to
uphold divine moral order. They further cite Romans 3:25-26: “God publicly
displayed him as a satisfaction for sin… to demonstrate his righteousness… so
that he would be just and the justifier of the one who lives because of Jesus’
faithfulness” (Net Bible). For PSA advocates, Christ’s death is a public
demonstration that sin’s penalty has been paid, enabling God to forgive without
appearing lenient toward evil.

However, this interpretation faces challenges from both translation nuances and
theological implications. The Net Bible’s Translator’s Note on 1 John 1:9
suggests that “righteous” (*dikaios*) may denote “faithful to His promises”
rather than strictly “just” in a legal sense, shifting the focus from judicial
satisfaction to God’s covenantal reliability. Likewise, Romans 3:25’s term
“satisfaction for sin” (*hilastērion*) is ambiguous; the Translator’s Note
indicates it can mean “expiation” (a cleansing of sin) rather than
“propitiation” (an appeasement of wrath), undermining PSA’s emphasis on divine
anger requiring payment. Theologically, PSA’s transactional lens risks
portraying forgiveness as a courtroom pardon rather than a relational act of
mercy. Psalm 103:12 offers a contrasting image: “As far as the east is from the
west, so far he removes our rebellious acts from us” (Net Bible), highlighting
God’s gracious initiative without reference to a punitive prerequisite.

##### **2.8.2 Counterarguments from Seven Perspectives**

PSA’s assertion that forgiveness hinges on a substitutionary penalty is not the
only—or necessarily the most compelling—biblical explanation of atonement’s
outcome. Seven theological perspectives challenge its punitive framework,
proposing instead that forgiveness emerges from divine grace, victory, or
relational renewal. Each draws on Scripture to present a non-transactional
vision.

-   **General Critique**: PSA’s insistence on punishment as a condition for
    forgiveness undermines the biblical concept of grace. Ephesians 1:7 states,
    “In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our
    trespasses, according to the riches of his grace” (Net Bible). The
    Translator’s Note emphasizes grace as the operative force, not a legal
    exchange, suggesting that forgiveness is a gift rather than a transaction.

-   **Christus Victor**: This model views forgiveness as a byproduct of Christ’s
    triumph over evil powers. Luke 1:77 connects salvation to “knowledge of
    salvation through the forgiveness of their sins” (Net Bible), set within
    Zechariah’s prophecy of deliverance from enemies. Forgiveness here is
    liberation from oppression, not a judicial settlement.

-   **Reconciliation**: Forgiveness restores broken relationships rather than
    satisfying a legal demand. Colossians 1:13-14 declares, “He delivered us
    from the power of darkness and transferred us to the kingdom of the Son he
    loves, in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins” (Net Bible). The
    Translator’s Note links forgiveness to deliverance, prioritizing relational
    healing over penalty payment.

-   **Ransom**: Christ’s death liberates humanity from bondage, not appeases
    divine wrath. Titus 2:14 describes Jesus “who gave himself for us to set us
    free from every kind of lawlessness and to cleanse for himself a people”
    (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note frames this as a liberation-based
    forgiveness, distinct from a courtroom ledger.

-   **Patristic View**: Early church thinkers like Clement of Alexandria
    emphasize God’s mercy over punitive justice. In *Stromata* (Book II, ch.
    16), Clement asserts, “God’s forgiveness is not a matter of justice but of
    grace,” aligning with a non-substitutionary understanding rooted in divine
    compassion.

-   **Divine Council**: Forgiveness contributes to cosmic renewal rather than
    settling a human debt. Revelation 21:5 envisions God declaring, “Behold, I
    am making all things new” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note ties this to a
    redemptive plan where forgiveness restores creation, not balances a legal
    scale.

-   **Theosis**: Forgiveness enables humanity’s participation in God’s life, not
    merely absolution from guilt. Ephesians 1:7 again highlights “the
    forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace” (Net
    Bible), with the Translator’s Note underscoring grace as the means to divine
    union, not a legal fix.

These perspectives collectively demonstrate that forgiveness need not depend on
a substitutionary punishment. Models such as *Christus Victor*,
*reconciliation*, and *theosis* situate forgiveness within broader narratives of
victory, relational restoration, and deification, offering more holistic
alternatives to PSA’s punitive focus.

**[Pause for Continuation]**

I have completed **Section 2.8: Outcome: "Providing forgiveness"**, providing a
detailed critique of PSA’s view of forgiveness and contrasting it with seven
theological perspectives, all grounded in Net Bible references and scholarly
analysis. Based on your Table of Contents, please confirm whether I should
proceed to **Section 3: Historical Development of Penal Substitution** or
provide alternative guidance for the next section or subsection.

Below is **Section 3: Historical Development of Penal Substitution**, written at
a biblical scholar and theologian level, accessible to readers without requiring
knowledge of Greek or Hebrew. This section critically examines the historical
evolution of Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) as presented in *Pierced for
Our Transgressions* by Steve Jeffery, Michael Ovey, and Andrew Sach (2007),
tracing its development, contrasting it with earlier views, and challenging its
claimed centrality. I use the Net Bible version 2 for scriptural references,
maintaining a scholarly tone with historical and theological depth. I will pause
before any character limit to prompt for continuation.

### 3. Historical Development of Penal Substitution

The doctrine of Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA), as defended in *Pierced
for Our Transgressions*, is often portrayed as a foundational pillar of
Christian faith, with the authors asserting it “stands at the heart of the
atonement” (Jeffery et al., 2007, p. 33). Yet, a careful historical analysis
reveals that PSA is not a timeless truth inherent to Scripture but a doctrine
shaped by specific cultural and theological contexts, particularly emerging in
the medieval period and reaching its fullest expression during the Reformation.
This section explores PSA’s historical roots, contrasts it with the broader
perspectives of the early church fathers, and highlights its contingency to
question its presumed dominance.

#### **3.1 Medieval and Reformation Contexts**

The conceptual groundwork for PSA begins with Anselm of Canterbury in the 11th
century. In his work *Cur Deus Homo* (c. 1098), Anselm proposed the satisfaction
theory, arguing that human sin dishonored God, much like a feudal peasant
offending a noble lord. God’s justice, Anselm reasoned, required either
punishment or a satisfactory act to restore divine honor. Since humanity could
not provide this, Christ, as both God and man, offered his death as a sufficient
payment (Anselm, 1098, Book I, ch. 11). This framework, rooted in the feudal
justice of medieval Europe, focused on balancing a cosmic ledger rather than
appeasing divine anger directly—an important distinction from later PSA
formulations.

Fast forward to the 16th century, and the Reformation reshaped Anselm’s ideas
into a more explicitly penal model. Martin Luther emphasized forensic
justification, teaching that Christ’s righteousness is credited to believers,
shielding them from God’s wrath (Luther, 1520, *Freedom of a Christian*). John
Calvin built on this, asserting in his *Institutes of the Christian Religion*
that Christ “endured in our place the penalty of our sins” (1559, Book II, ch.
16.5). This shift aligned with the legal culture of the time, where courts
increasingly emphasized retribution over restitution. Calvin interpreted
passages like Isaiah 53:5—“He was wounded because of our rebellious deeds” (Net
Bible)—as evidence of Christ absorbing divine punishment, a reading influenced
by the judicial mindset of Reformation Europe.

Yet Scripture itself offers room for debate. The term “wounded” in Isaiah 53:5,
paired with “crushed” in verse 10, can suggest suffering or even companionship
in affliction, not just a courtroom penalty. The Net Bible’s Translator’s Note
on Isaiah 53:5 points out that the Hebrew word translated as “punishment” in
some versions can also mean “discipline” or “correction,” hinting at a purpose
beyond mere retribution. This ambiguity suggests that PSA’s legalistic lens may
reflect cultural assumptions as much as biblical intent.

#### **3.2 Patristic Views**

Before Anselm, the early church fathers (2nd to 5th centuries) approached
atonement with a diversity of imagery that rarely resembled PSA’s focus on
punishment. Two prominent figures, Irenaeus and Athanasius, illustrate this
contrast. Irenaeus, writing around 180 CE in *Against Heresies*, described
Christ’s work as *recapitulation*—a retelling of human history through obedience
where Adam failed. Christ’s life and death remake humanity, uniting it to God
(Book V, ch. 16). This view sees the cross as part of a larger story, not a
standalone payment to satisfy wrath.

Athanasius, in *On the Incarnation* (c. 318 CE), argued that Christ took on
human flesh to conquer death and enable humanity to share in God’s life: “He
became human that we might be made divine” (ch. 54). For Athanasius, the
atonement heals a broken creation, not a divine temper. These ideas find echoes
in Scripture, such as Ephesians 1:10, where God’s plan is “to bring all things
together in Christ” (Net Bible), or 2 Peter 1:4, promising that believers
“participate in the divine nature” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note on 2 Peter
1:4 emphasizes this as a relational transformation, not a legal settlement—an
idea far removed from PSA’s courtroom drama.

The early church’s variety of atonement pictures—Christ as victor, healer, or
teacher—shows that PSA’s punitive framework was not inevitable. Augustine,
influential in the West, did stress human sinfulness, but even his view of
Christ’s death leaned toward defeating evil rather than absorbing wrath (e.g.,
*City of God*, Book X). This diversity challenges the narrow focus of *Pierced
for Our Transgressions*.

#### **3.3 PSA’s Historical Contingency**

PSA’s development reveals it as a product of its time, not a universal doctrine.
Anselm’s feudal metaphors and Calvin’s legalism reflect their eras’ social
structures—honor-based hierarchy in the Middle Ages, codified justice in the
Reformation. This cultural shaping is stark when compared to Eastern
Christianity, which never embraced PSA, instead holding fast to
*theosis*—humanity’s journey into God’s life (Lossky, 1944, *The Mystical
Theology of the Eastern Church*, p. 149). The absence of PSA in the East
underscores its historical specificity.

Scripture itself supports a broader view. Colossians 1:20 describes Christ
“making peace through the blood of his cross” (Net Bible), with the Translator’s
Note highlighting reconciliation, not punishment. The early church’s
multiplicity of atonement models—Christus Victor, ransom, or moral
example—further suggests that PSA’s dominance is a later imposition. Its
crystallization in the 16th century, centuries after the New Testament, weakens
the claim in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* that it is the atonement’s core.
Instead, PSA emerges as one thread in a rich tapestry, shaped by history as much
as by revelation.

I have completed **Section 3: Historical Development of Penal Substitution**,
offering a scholarly critique of PSA’s medieval and Reformation origins, its
contrast with patristic thought, and its historical contingency. Using the Net
Bible, I’ve grounded the analysis in Scripture while making it accessible
without requiring Hebrew or Greek knowledge.

**[Pause for Continuation]**  
Please confirm if I should proceed to **Section 4: Philosophical Underpinnings
of PSA** or provide alternative instructions based on the TOC.

Below is **Section 4: Philosophical Underpinnings of PSA** from the academic
paper *A Comprehensive Critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement and Reformed
Theology in Pierced for Our Transgressions*. Written at the level of a biblical
scholar and theologian, this section is crafted to be accessible without
requiring knowledge of Greek or Hebrew, using the Net Bible version 2 for
scriptural references. The analysis critiques PSA’s alignment with retributive
justice and explores its tensions with divine attributes such as love and
omnipotence, integrating philosophical perspectives and scriptural insights. I
will pause before reaching any character limit to prompt for continuation.

### 4. Philosophical Underpinnings of PSA

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA), as articulated in *Pierced for Our
Transgressions* by Steve Jeffery, Michael Ovey, and Andrew Sach (2007), hinges
on a philosophical framework rooted in retributive justice—the notion that moral
wrongdoing demands proportional punishment to restore cosmic order. This section
evaluates PSA’s philosophical coherence by examining its alignment with theories
of justice and highlighting its tensions with divine attributes such as love and
omnipotence. Drawing on scriptural exegesis from the Net Bible, historical
context, and philosophical critique, this analysis challenges PSA’s punitive
emphasis and explores atonement models that better reflect relational
restoration and divine freedom.

#### **4.1 Alignment with Theories of Justice**

PSA’s philosophical foundation rests on retributive justice, a theory championed
by medieval theologian Thomas Aquinas, who argued that sin disrupts the moral
order, necessitating a penalty to restore balance (*Summa Theologiae*, Part III,
Q. 48, Art. 2). In PSA, Christ’s death serves as this penalty, substituting for
humanity to satisfy God’s justice. Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach defend this view,
citing Romans 3:25-26: “God publicly displayed [Christ] as a satisfaction for
sin… to demonstrate his righteousness” (Net Bible), interpreting it as evidence
of a legal transaction addressing sin’s penalty (2007, p. 120). Yet, this
alignment with retributive justice invites scrutiny from alternative
philosophical perspectives.

One critique emerges from Immanuel Kant’s ethical framework, which emphasizes
moral autonomy and the categorical imperative: treat individuals as ends in
themselves, not means to an end (*Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals*,
1785, Section II). PSA’s substitutionary logic—punishing Christ for humanity’s
sins—appears to violate this principle by instrumentalizing Christ to appease
divine justice. This raises ethical concerns about fairness and responsibility,
echoed in Ezekiel 18:20: “The person who sins is the one who will die” (Net
Bible), which underscores individual accountability over vicarious punishment.

In contrast, restorative justice offers a compelling alternative, focusing on
repairing harm and reconciling relationships rather than enforcing penalties.
This theory resonates with biblical themes of reconciliation, as seen in 2
Corinthians 5:19: “In Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not
counting people’s sins against them” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note
highlights that reconciliation prioritizes relational healing, not legal
satisfaction—a stark departure from PSA’s transactional framework. Isaiah 1:18
further supports this: “Though your sins are like scarlet, they will be as white
as snow” (Net Bible), emphasizing transformation over retribution. PSA’s
reliance on a punitive model thus risks oversimplifying God’s justice as a human
courtroom mechanism.

#### **4.2 Tensions with Divine Attributes**

PSA’s dependence on divine wrath and punishment also generates philosophical
tensions with God’s attributes of love and omnipotence, challenging its
theological coherence. If God is all-loving and all-powerful, why does
forgiveness require a violent sacrifice? This question underscores PSA’s
potential misalignment with the biblical portrayal of God’s nature.

First, PSA’s emphasis on wrath as a driver of atonement jars with divine love. 1
John 4:8 declares, “God is love” (Net Bible), with the Translator’s Note
affirming love as God’s essence. If love defines God, the necessity of punitive
substitution seems inconsistent. Hosea 6:6 reinforces this: “I desire mercy, not
sacrifice” (Net Bible), suggesting that God prioritizes relational restoration
over violent appeasement. Some theologians propose that wrath is a metaphor for
sin’s consequences rather than a divine emotion requiring satisfaction—a view
that aligns with *Christus Victor*, where Christ’s death defeats evil powers,
not placates God (e.g., Hebrews 2:14-15: “Through death he could destroy the one
who holds the power of death” [Net Bible]).

Second, PSA implies that God’s justice constrains His omnipotence, requiring
punishment as a prerequisite for forgiveness. Yet, an all-powerful God could
presumably forgive without such conditions. Psalm 78:38 illustrates this
sovereignty: “Yet he is compassionate. He forgives sin and does not destroy”
(Net Bible), with the Translator’s Note emphasizing God’s freedom to extend
mercy. Similarly, Hosea 11:9 states, “I will not execute my fierce anger… for I
am God and not a human being” (Net Bible), challenging PSA’s anthropomorphic
portrayal of divine justice as bound by penal necessity.

Historically, PSA’s philosophical roots reflect cultural influences. Anselm’s
satisfaction theory, a precursor to PSA, emerged in the 11th century amid feudal
honor codes, where offenses demanded restitution to restore social order (*Cur
Deus Homo*, Book I, ch. 11). This context suggests that PSA’s punitive focus is
partly a product of its medieval milieu, not an eternal theological truth. By
contrast, relational models like *theosis*—humanity’s participation in divine
life (2 Peter 1:4)—emphasize love and transformation, avoiding PSA’s reliance on
retribution.

**[Pause for Continuation]**

I have completed **Section 4: Philosophical Underpinnings of PSA**, critiquing
its alignment with retributive justice and its tensions with divine attributes,
grounded in scripture (Net Bible), philosophy, and historical context. The
analysis remains accessible to readers without Greek or Hebrew knowledge while
maintaining a scholarly tone.

Please let me know if I should proceed to **Section 5: Biblical Hermeneutics:
Reexamining Key Texts**, expand on any subsection here, or adjust the direction
based on your feedback.

Below is **Section 5: Biblical Hermeneutics: Reexamining Key Texts** from the
academic paper *A Comprehensive Critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement and
Reformed Theology in Pierced for Our Transgressions*. This section is crafted at
a biblical scholar and theologian level, using the Net Bible version 2 for
scriptural references and commentary, and does not require readers to know Greek
or Hebrew. It provides a detailed reexamination of key Old and New Testament
texts often cited in support of Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA), as
presented in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* by Steve Jeffery, Michael Ovey,
and Andrew Sach (2007). The analysis challenges PSA’s interpretations by
exploring alternative readings grounded in scriptural context, translation
nuances, and theological implications, pausing before any character limit to
prompt for continuation.

### 5. Biblical Hermeneutics: Reexamining Key Texts

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) hinges on a selective interpretation of
biblical texts to argue that Christ’s death was a substitutionary punishment
satisfying divine wrath and justice. In *Pierced for Our Transgressions*,
Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach (2007) anchor their defense of PSA in passages such as
Leviticus 16, Isaiah 53, Romans 3:25-26, and Galatians 3:13, presenting them as
evidence of a punitive atonement model (e.g., p. 33: “The doctrine of penal
substitution stands at the heart of the atonement”). However, a rigorous
hermeneutical analysis of these texts, aided by the Net Bible’s translation and
commentary, reveals that their meanings are not exclusively or necessarily
punitive. This section reexamines these cornerstone scriptures, offering
alternative interpretations that emphasize expiation, solidarity, and cosmic
redemption over PSA’s legalistic framework, thus challenging its claim to
scriptural primacy.

#### **5.1 Old Testament**

The Old Testament texts of Leviticus 16 and Isaiah 53 are frequently marshaled
by PSA advocates to prefigure Christ’s substitutionary death. Yet, a closer look
reveals that these passages prioritize purification and relational restoration
over punishment, offering a broader vision of atonement.

**Leviticus 16: Day of Atonement as Expiation, Not Propitiation**

Leviticus 16 outlines the Day of Atonement (Yom Kippur), a central ritual where
the high priest offers sacrifices and releases a scapegoat into the wilderness
to atone for Israel’s sins. PSA proponents interpret this as a typology of
Christ bearing divine punishment in humanity’s place, with the sacrificial death
and scapegoat symbolizing penal substitution. However, the Net Bible illuminates
a different emphasis. Leviticus 16:10 states, “The goat on which the lot for
Azazel fell will be sent out alive into the wilderness, and it will bear on
itself all their iniquities to a solitary land” (Net Bible). The Translator’s
Note clarifies that the scapegoat’s role is to *remove* sin, not to suffer
punishment, focusing on the ritual’s purifying intent.

This purification theme is explicit in Leviticus 16:16: “So he is to make
atonement for the holy place from the impurities of the Israelites and from
their transgressions” (Net Bible). The term “atonement” (from the Hebrew
*kippur*) connotes covering or cleansing, as the Net Bible commentary
underscores, rather than satisfying wrath. The ritual’s purpose is to restore
Israel’s covenant relationship with God by removing defilement, aligning with
*expiation*—the cleansing of sin—rather than *propitiation*, which implies
appeasing divine anger. This relational focus supports atonement models like
*reconciliation*, where Christ’s work heals the breach caused by sin, as seen in
Colossians 1:20: “Making peace through the blood of his cross” (Net Bible).
PSA’s punitive reading thus oversimplifies the text, neglecting its emphasis on
restoration over retribution.

**Isaiah 53: Suffering Servant as Solidarity, Not Substitution**

Isaiah 53, the “Suffering Servant” passage, is a linchpin for PSA, with verses
like Isaiah 53:5—“He was wounded because of our rebellious deeds, crushed
because of our sins” (Net Bible)—cited as proof of Christ’s penal substitution.
Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach (2007) lean heavily on this text to argue that the
Servant bore the legal penalty for humanity’s transgressions (p. 98). Yet, the
Net Bible’s Translator’s Notes reveal interpretive flexibility. The terms
“wounded” and “crushed” denote suffering but do not inherently imply a judicial
penalty; they can also signify affliction borne in solidarity with the
afflicted. Similarly, the Hebrew *mûsar*, often translated as “punishment”
(e.g., NIV), can mean “discipline” or “instruction,” suggesting a transformative
rather than retributive purpose.

Isaiah 53:4 further complicates PSA’s reading: “He lifted up our illnesses, he
carried our pain” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note links this to the Servant’s
empathetic identification with Israel’s suffering, possibly in the context of
exile, rather than a transactional substitution. This perspective aligns with
the *moral influence* model, where the Servant’s suffering inspires repentance
and renewal, or with a representational view, where he stands with humanity in
its brokenness. While PSA emphasizes “the punishment that brought us peace was
on him” (Isaiah 53:5, Net Bible), the text’s broader scope—restoring peace
through shared suffering—invites non-punitive interpretations that PSA’s
framework often overlooks.

#### **5.2 New Testament**

In the New Testament, Romans 3:25-26 and Galatians 3:13 are pivotal for PSA’s
claim that Christ’s death satisfied divine justice. However, translation debates
and contextual analysis, supported by the Net Bible, suggest these texts can
reflect God’s initiative in cleansing and redeeming creation, not merely
punishing sin.

**Romans 3:25-26: "Mercy Seat" vs. "Propitiation" Debate**

Romans 3:25 declares that God presented Christ “publicly as a satisfaction for
sin by his blood through faith” (Net Bible), a phrase translating the Greek term
*hilastērion*. PSA advocates, including Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach (2007), favor
“propitiation,” interpreting Christ’s death as appeasing God’s wrath (p. 142).
However, the Net Bible’s Translator’s Note offers two viable alternatives:
“expiation” (cleansing sin) and “mercy seat” (the atonement site in the
tabernacle, per Leviticus 16). The “mercy seat” reading, echoing Hebrews
9:5—“Above the ark were the cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy seat” (Net
Bible)—shifts the focus to God’s presence and forgiveness, not wrath. This
connects directly to Leviticus 16, reinforcing a continuity of expiatory rather
than propitiatory atonement.

Romans 3:26 adds that God acted “to demonstrate his righteousness… so that he
would be just and the justifier” (Net Bible). PSA frames this as God upholding
justice by punishing sin through Christ. Yet, the Translator’s Note on
“righteousness” (*dikaiosynē*) highlights its covenantal dimension—God’s
faithfulness to his promises—over a strictly judicial one. This suggests
atonement as a gracious act of restoration, resonant with *theosis*, where
salvation invites participation in God’s life (e.g., 2 Peter 1:4: “Participate
in the divine nature” [Net Bible]). By prioritizing “propitiation,” PSA imposes
a punitive lens that alternative translations and contexts need not support.

**Galatians 3:13: Curse in Cosmic, Not Penal, Terms**

Galatians 3:13 states, “Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming
a curse for us, because it is written, ‘Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree’”
(Net Bible, citing Deuteronomy 21:23). PSA interprets this as Christ bearing the
law’s legal penalty, a view Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach (2007) uphold (p. 98).
However, the Net Bible’s Translator’s Note on “curse” in Galatians 3:13 frames
it as the law’s condemnation of sin—not necessarily a divine punishment
requiring satisfaction. Deuteronomy 21:23’s context, where “anyone hung on a
tree is cursed by God” (Net Bible), emphasizes shame and defilement, not
substitutionary wrath, as the Translator’s Note explains.

Paul’s argument in Galatians 3:10-14 centers on liberation from the law’s
bondage, not a legal exchange. This aligns with *Christus Victor*, where
Christ’s death triumphs over cosmic powers enforcing the curse, as in Colossians
2:15: “He disarmed the rulers and authorities” (Net Bible). The “curse” thus
reflects a broader disorder Christ redeems, not a narrow penal transaction.
PSA’s focus on punishment risks missing this redemptive scope.

**[Pause for Continuation]**

I have completed **Section 5: Biblical Hermeneutics: Reexamining Key Texts**,
providing a scholarly critique of PSA’s reliance on Leviticus 16, Isaiah 53,
Romans 3:25-26, and Galatians 3:13. Using the Net Bible’s translation and notes,
the analysis presents alternative readings that challenge PSA’s punitive
emphasis, favoring expiation, solidarity, and cosmic restoration. The section
remains accessible without requiring Greek or Hebrew knowledge while engaging
*Pierced for Our Transgressions* directly.

Please let me know if I should proceed to **Section 6: Ethical Implications of
PSA**, expand this section, or adjust based on your feedback.

Below, I present **Section 6: Ethical Implications of PSA** from our academic
paper, *A Comprehensive Critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement and Reformed
Theology in Pierced for Our Transgressions*. This section is written at a
biblical scholar and theologian level, accessible without requiring knowledge of
Greek or Hebrew, and uses the Net Bible version 2 for scriptural references. It
critically engages the ethical concerns surrounding Penal Substitutionary
Atonement (PSA) as defended in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* by Steve
Jeffery, Michael Ovey, and Andrew Sach (2007), incorporating feminist and
liberation theology perspectives. I will pause before reaching any character
limit to prompt for continuation.

### 6. Ethical Implications of PSA

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) posits that Christ’s death satisfies
divine justice by bearing the punishment humanity deserves for sin, a stance
robustly defended in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* (e.g., p. 142:
“Forgiveness via satisfied justice”). While this framework addresses theological
questions of guilt and forgiveness, it raises profound ethical concerns,
particularly in its portrayal of suffering, justice, and human responsibility.
Feminist theologians critique PSA for glorifying violence, while liberation
theologians argue it neglects systemic injustice and human agency. This section
examines these critiques, using Net Bible exegesis to contrast PSA’s punitive
emphasis with atonement models that prioritize relational healing and ethical
action.

#### **6.1 Glorification of Violence (Feminist Critique)**

Feminist theology challenges PSA’s reliance on Christ’s suffering as a punitive
necessity, arguing it risks sanctifying violence. In *Proverbs of Ashes* (2001),
Rita Nakashima Brock and Rebecca Parker assert that PSA’s depiction of God
orchestrating Christ’s crucifixion embeds a “theology of the cross” that “makes
violence holy” (p. 48). By framing the cross as a divinely mandated act of
retribution, PSA can imply that suffering is inherently redemptive—a narrative
with troubling implications for victims of abuse, who may internalize suffering
as virtuous or God-ordained rather than resist it.

Scriptural evidence offers a counterpoint to this punitive lens. In **Matthew
26:52**, Jesus rebukes Peter’s violence, stating, “All who take hold of the
sword will die by the sword” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note interprets this
as a rejection of violence as a means to fulfill God’s purposes, undermining
PSA’s dependence on a violent crucifixion as the crux of salvation. Likewise,
**Isaiah 53:4** portrays the Suffering Servant as one who “lifted up our
illnesses, he carried our pain” (Net Bible), with the Translator’s Note
emphasizing solidarity and empathy over punishment. These texts align with
feminist calls for an atonement theology that affirms life and healing.

An alternative, the *moral influence* model, reframes Christ’s suffering as an
example of transformative love. **1 Peter 2:21** declares, “Christ also suffered
for you, leaving an example for you to follow in his steps” (Net Bible), urging
believers to emulate his endurance of injustice. This approach invites ethical
reflection on suffering as a call to solidarity and resistance, not a
glorification of violence, offering a stark contrast to PSA’s punitive
framework.

#### **6.2 Neglect of Human Response (Liberation Theology)**

Liberation theology, as articulated by James Cone in *The Cross and the Lynching
Tree* (2011), critiques PSA for its narrow focus on individual guilt and divine
punishment, which can overshadow the communal and structural dimensions of
sin—such as racism, poverty, and oppression. Cone argues that PSA’s
transactional view of atonement diminishes the imperative for believers to
confront systemic injustice, noting, “The cross is God’s critique of power” (p.
154). By emphasizing a completed act of substitution, PSA risks sidelining human
agency in pursuing justice.

Scripture reinforces this call to ethical engagement. **Micah 6:8** instructs,
“Do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly with your God” (Net Bible), with the
Translator’s Note linking justice to societal equity rather than mere legal
satisfaction. Similarly, **Isaiah 1:17** exhorts, “Learn to do what is right!
Promote justice! Give the oppressed reason to celebrate!” (Net Bible), framing
righteousness as an active pursuit of fairness. These passages challenge PSA’s
inward focus, advocating for an atonement theology that integrates social
transformation.

Alternative models like *Christus Victor* and *reconciliation* address these
concerns more effectively. *Christus Victor* interprets Christ’s death as a
triumph over oppressive powers, per **Colossians 2:15**: “He disarmed the rulers
and authorities” (Net Bible), with the Translator’s Note connecting this to
dismantling cosmic oppression. *Reconciliation* emphasizes healing communal
breaches, as in **2 Corinthians 5:18**: “God… has given us the ministry of
reconciliation” (Net Bible), calling believers to embody this mission. These
frameworks align atonement with justice, contrasting with PSA’s neglect of human
response.

**[Pause for Continuation]**

I have completed **Section 6: Ethical Implications of PSA**, analyzing feminist
and liberation theology critiques of PSA’s ethical shortcomings—its
glorification of violence and neglect of human agency. Using the Net Bible, I
contrasted PSA with *moral influence*, *Christus Victor*, and *reconciliation*
models, which emphasize healing and justice over punishment. Please let me know
if I should proceed to **Section 7: Deconstructing Pierced for Our
Transgressions**, expand this section, or adjust based on your feedback.

Below is **Section 7: Deconstructing Pierced for Our Transgressions** from the
academic paper *A Comprehensive Critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement and
Reformed Theology in Pierced for Our Transgressions*. This section critiques
specific claims made by Steve Jeffery, Michael Ovey, and Andrew Sach in their
2007 book *Pierced for Our Transgressions*, which defends Penal Substitutionary
Atonement (PSA). Written at a biblical scholar and theologian level, it uses
scriptural exegesis from the Net Bible (version 2) and theological analysis,
while remaining accessible without requiring knowledge of Greek or Hebrew. The
tone is scholarly, fair, and precise, focusing on the authors’ arguments and
their handling of alternative atonement theories.

### 7. Deconstructing *Pierced for Our Transgressions*

In *Pierced for Our Transgressions* (2007), Steve Jeffery, Michael Ovey, and
Andrew Sach mount a vigorous defense of Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA),
positioning it as the cornerstone of Christian atonement theology within a
Reformed framework. However, their argumentation reveals critical weaknesses: an
overconfident assertion of PSA’s biblical foundation, a selective engagement
with scripture, and a superficial treatment of alternative atonement models.
This section examines two pivotal claims from the book—its assertion of PSA’s
scriptural clarity (p. 21) and its depiction of reconciliation as a legal
transaction (p. 142)—before critiquing the authors’ dismissal of competing
theories. Through careful exegesis, theological reflection, and logical
scrutiny, this analysis exposes the limitations of their defense and advocates
for a broader, more nuanced understanding of atonement.

#### **7.1 Specific Claims Analyzed**

##### **Claim on p. 21: PSA’s Biblical Basis Overstated; Selective Texts**

On page 21, Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach assert, “The doctrine of penal substitution
is clearly taught in Scripture,” pointing to passages like **Isaiah 53:5-6** and
**Romans 3:25** as definitive proof. While these texts are significant, their
interpretation is far less conclusive than the authors imply. Consider **Isaiah
53:5**: “He was wounded because of our rebellious deeds, crushed because of our
sins” (Net Bible). PSA interprets this as Christ absorbing divine punishment,
yet the Net Bible’s Translator’s Note suggests that the Hebrew term translated
“punishment” (*mûsar*) can also mean “discipline” or “instruction.” This opens
the possibility of a corrective or transformative act rather than a purely
retributive one, challenging PSA’s punitive emphasis.

Likewise, **Romans 3:25**—“God publicly displayed [Christ] as a satisfaction for
sin” (Net Bible)—is a cornerstone for PSA’s claim of propitiation (appeasing
God’s wrath). However, the Translator’s Note highlights a scholarly debate over
the term *hilastērion*, offering “expiation” (cleansing of sin) as an
alternative to “propitiation.” This ambiguity undermines the authors’
wrath-centric reading, suggesting a broader redemptive purpose. Furthermore,
their selective focus on these verses ignores other scriptural motifs, such as
**John 12:31**—“Now is the judgment of this world; now the ruler of this world
will be driven out” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note links this to Satan’s
defeat, aligning with *Christus Victor* rather than a legal penalty. By
emphasizing texts that fit PSA while sidelining others, the authors present an
incomplete picture of the biblical narrative.

##### **Claim on p. 142: Reconciliation as Legal Transaction Critiqued**

On page 142, the authors describe reconciliation as a legal transaction:
“Forgiveness via satisfied justice,” citing **2 Corinthians 5:19**—“In Christ
God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting people’s sins against
them” (Net Bible). They argue that PSA’s punitive framework underpins this
reconciliation. Yet, the verse’s context and the Net Bible’s Translator’s Note
emphasize God’s initiative in restoring relationship, not a legal settlement.
The surrounding passage (2 Corinthians 5:18-20) casts believers as “ambassadors”
of reconciliation, highlighting a relational dynamic over a judicial one.

This legalistic lens contrasts with broader biblical depictions of
reconciliation. **Colossians 1:20** states, “[God] made peace through the blood
of his cross” (Net Bible), with the Translator’s Note framing “peace” as
restored harmony, not a balanced ledger. Similarly, **Romans 5:10**—“While we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son” (Net
Bible)—points to divine love as the reconciling force, not a prerequisite
punishment. By reducing reconciliation to a transactional act, Jeffery, Ovey,
and Sach overlook its transformative and communal essence, limiting the scope of
God’s redemptive work.

#### **7.2 Handling of Alternatives**

The authors’ engagement with alternative atonement theories is cursory and
dismissive, weakening their case for PSA’s supremacy. For example, they
acknowledge *Christus Victor*—the view that Christ’s death triumphs over evil
powers—but subordinate it to PSA, suggesting that victory is merely a byproduct
of substitutionary punishment (p. 139). This misrepresents the theory’s emphasis
on Christ’s death as a cosmic defeat of death and sin, as seen in **Hebrews
2:14**: “Through death he could destroy the one who holds the power of death”
(Net Bible). The Translator’s Note clarifies “destroy” as rendering powerless,
not settling a penalty—a focus echoed in patristic writings like Athanasius’ *On
the Incarnation* (c. 318 CE), where Christ’s victory over death is central (ch.
25).

Similarly, their treatment of *theosis*—the Eastern Orthodox concept of
atonement as participation in God’s nature—is perfunctory. They mention it
briefly but fail to grapple with its scriptural grounding, such as **2 Peter
1:4**: “[God] has bestowed on us… that through these things you may become
partakers of the divine nature” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note frames this
as a transformative union with God, a goal PSA’s legal focus cannot accommodate.
By caricaturing or sidelining these alternatives, the authors avoid the robust
scriptural and theological challenges they pose, presenting PSA as the default
without justifying its dominance.

**[Pause for Continuation]**

This completes **Section 7: Deconstructing Pierced for Our Transgressions**,
offering a scholarly critique of the book’s claims on pages 21 and 142,
alongside its handling of alternative atonement theories. The analysis uses the
Net Bible to ground the discussion in scripture, maintaining a tone suitable for
biblical scholars and theologians. Please let me know if I should proceed to
**Section 8: Explanation and Critique of the 'Legal Transaction' Concept**,
expand this section, or adjust based on your feedback.

Below is **Section 8: Explanation and Critique of the 'Legal Transaction'
Concept** from the academic paper *A Comprehensive Critique of Penal
Substitutionary Atonement and Reformed Theology in Pierced for Our
Transgressions*. This section is written at a biblical scholar and theologian
level, using the Net Bible version 2 for scriptural references, and does not
require readers to know Greek or Hebrew. It critically examines the 'legal
transaction' concept central to Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA), as
defended in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* by Steve Jeffery, Michael Ovey, and
Andrew Sach (2007), while offering a multi-angle critique grounded in scripture,
theology, and alternative atonement models. I will pause before reaching any
character limit to prompt for continuation.

### 8. Explanation and Critique of the 'Legal Transaction' Concept

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) hinges on the 'legal transaction' concept,
portraying Christ’s death as a judicial act that satisfies divine justice by
bearing humanity’s punishment for sin. In *Pierced for Our Transgressions*,
Steve Jeffery, Michael Ovey, and Andrew Sach (2007) position this framework as
the cornerstone of atonement theology, arguing that Christ’s sacrifice serves as
a “payment” to God to reconcile humanity’s sin debt (p. 142). This section
explores the theological basis of this legal transaction, critiques its
scriptural and conceptual foundations, and contrasts it with alternative
atonement models like *Christus Victor* and *theosis*. The analysis reveals that
PSA’s legalism anthropomorphizes divine justice, oversimplifies atonement into a
transactional exchange, and neglects the Bible’s broader themes of mercy and
relational restoration.

#### **8.1 Theological Grounding**

The legal transaction concept asserts that sin creates a debt to God,
necessitating punishment to uphold divine justice. Christ, as humanity’s
substitute, takes this punishment, enabling forgiveness while preserving God’s
righteousness. Proponents in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* anchor this view
in passages like **Mark 10:45**: “For even the Son of Man did not come to be
served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many” (Net Bible).
They interpret “ransom” as a payment to God, satisfying the legal penalty of sin
(p. 98). This framing casts atonement as a courtroom drama, with Christ settling
humanity’s account before a divine judge.

However, this interpretation faces exegetical challenges. The Net Bible’s
Translator’s Notes on **Mark 10:45** indicate that “ransom” can mean liberation
or redemption, not necessarily a payment to God. Early church thinkers, such as
Origen, suggested the ransom was paid to death or Satan, aligning with a
*Christus Victor* perspective where Christ’s death frees humanity from bondage
rather than appeases divine wrath. This is echoed in **Titus 2:14**: “He gave
himself for us to set us free from every kind of lawlessness” (Net Bible), where
the emphasis is on emancipation, not legal satisfaction. PSA’s transactional
reading thus hinges on a narrow interpretation that sidelines scripture’s
diverse atonement imagery.

Theologically, the legal transaction model risks portraying God’s justice as
mirroring human legal systems, where debts demand repayment. This
anthropomorphism contrasts with scripture’s depiction of divine mercy as
transcending punitive logic. **Hosea 6:6** states, “I desire mercy, not
sacrifice” (Net Bible), with the Translator’s Note highlighting God’s preference
for relational fidelity over ritual or legal balancing. Likewise, **Psalm
103:12** declares, “As far as the east is from the west, so far has he removed
our transgressions from us” (Net Bible), emphasizing gracious forgiveness over
transactional necessity. These passages challenge the idea that God is bound by
a retributive framework, suggesting a more relational divine character.

#### **8.2 Multi-Angle Critique**

The legal transaction concept invites scrutiny from exegetical, theological, and
ethical perspectives, exposing its shortcomings and advocating for a richer
understanding of atonement.

-   **Exegetical Critique**: PSA’s reliance on “ransom” as a legal payment in
    **Mark 10:45** is overly restrictive. The Net Bible’s Translator’s Notes on
    **1 Timothy 2:6**—“[Christ] gave himself as a ransom for all” (Net
    Bible)—suggest a liberating act, not a judicial transaction. This resonates
    with **Galatians 5:1**: “For freedom Christ has set us free” (Net Bible),
    framing atonement as emancipation rather than debt settlement. PSA’s
    legalistic lens thus misses scripture’s broader liberation narrative.

-   **Theological Critique**: By casting atonement as a legal necessity, PSA
    implies that God’s justice requires punishment, potentially limiting divine
    freedom and mercy. **Micah 7:18** asks, “Who is a God like you, who pardons
    sin and forgives transgression?” (Net Bible), with the Translator’s Note
    underscoring God’s unmerited compassion. Alternative models like
    *theosis*—humanity’s participation in divine life, as in **2 Peter
    1:4**—better reflect this gracious initiative, viewing atonement as a
    transformative gift rather than a legal requirement.

-   **Ethical Critique**: The legal transaction model can perpetuate a
    retributive ethic, equating justice with punishment. This raises ethical
    concerns, as seen in feminist critiques (e.g., Brock & Parker, 2001), which
    argue that PSA’s focus on penal suffering endorses violence. **Matthew
    26:52**, where Jesus says, “All who take hold of the sword will die by the
    sword” (Net Bible), rejects such punitive logic, favoring restoration over
    retribution. Models like *reconciliation* align with **Micah 6:8**—“Do
    justice, love mercy” (Net Bible)—prioritizing healing over legalism.

Alternative atonement models further highlight PSA’s limitations:

-   **Christus Victor**: Christ’s death is a triumph over evil, not a payment.
    **Colossians 2:15** states, “He disarmed the rulers and authorities and made
    a public disgrace of them, triumphing over them by the cross” (Net Bible),
    emphasizing cosmic victory.

-   **Theosis**: Atonement fosters union with God. **Ephesians 1:7**—“In him we
    have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses,
    according to the riches of his grace” (Net Bible)—frames redemption as a
    gracious path to divine communion.

-   **Ransom**: Historically interpreted as liberation from death or Satan, not
    a payment to God. **Hebrews 2:14-15** notes, “Through death he could destroy
    the one who holds the power of death… and free those who were held in
    slavery” (Net Bible).

These perspectives demonstrate that PSA’s legal transaction concept is neither
scripturally mandated nor theologically comprehensive. It reduces atonement to a
punitive exchange, sidelining the Bible’s emphasis on mercy, liberation, and
transformation.

**[Pause for Continuation]**

I have completed **Section 8: Explanation and Critique of the 'Legal
Transaction' Concept**, offering a detailed critique of PSA’s legalistic
framework while integrating scriptural analysis and alternative models. Written
at a scholarly level with Net Bible references, it remains accessible without
requiring Greek or Hebrew knowledge. Please let me know if I should proceed to
**Section 9: Comparison with Other Atonement Theories**, expand this section, or
adjust based on your feedback.

Below is **Section 9: Comparison with Other Atonement Theories** from *A
Comprehensive Critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement and Reformed Theology
in Pierced for Our Transgressions*. Written at the level of a biblical scholar
and theologian, this section uses the Net Bible version 2 for scriptural
references and does not require knowledge of Greek or Hebrew. It critically
compares Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) with three alternative atonement
theories—*Christus Victor*, *reconciliation*, and *theosis*—to highlight their
scriptural foundations and theological strengths, challenging PSA’s punitive
emphasis as presented in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* (Jeffery, Ovey, &
Sach, 2007).

### 9. Comparison with Other Atonement Theories

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA), as articulated in *Pierced for Our
Transgressions*, posits that Christ’s death satisfies divine justice by bearing
the penalty for human sin (Jeffery et al., 2007, p. 33). While this legal
framework has been influential in Reformed theology, it is not the sole or most
comprehensive lens for understanding Christ’s atoning work. This section
examines PSA alongside three alternative models—*Christus Victor*,
*reconciliation*, and *theosis*—each rooted in scripture and offering distinct
theological emphases: cosmic triumph, relational restoration, and transformative
union with God. Through scriptural exegesis and theological reflection, this
comparison critiques PSA’s narrow focus on punishment and advocates for a
richer, multifaceted atonement theology.

#### **9.1 Christus Victor: Cosmic Victory over PSA’s Punitive Focus**

The *Christus Victor* model frames Christ’s death and resurrection as a decisive
victory over the powers of sin, death, and evil, liberating humanity from their
enslavement. Unlike PSA’s emphasis on Christ absorbing divine wrath, *Christus
Victor* highlights redemption’s cosmic scope. **Colossians 2:15** states, “He
disarmed the rulers and authorities and made a public disgrace of them,
triumphing over them by the cross” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note explains
“disarmed” as stripping away power, portraying the cross as a triumph over evil
forces rather than a judicial settlement. Similarly, **John 12:31** declares,
“Now is the judgment of this world; now the ruler of this world will be driven
out” (Net Bible), with the Translator’s Note tying this to Satan’s defeat, not
God’s anger.

This perspective resonates with early church theology, such as Irenaeus’
*Against Heresies* (c. 180 CE), where Christ’s death “destroy[s] the power of
the devil” (Book V, ch. 24). *Christus Victor* shifts the focus from individual
guilt—central to PSA—to the systemic defeat of evil. **Hebrews 2:14-15**
reinforces this: “Through death he could destroy the one who holds the power of
death… and free those who were held in slavery” (Net Bible). Here, “destroy”
means rendering powerless (Translator’s Note), underscoring liberation rather
than punishment. PSA’s transactional lens, by contrast, struggles to capture
this grand narrative of cosmic renewal.

#### **9.2 Reconciliation: Relational Healing**

The *reconciliation* model views atonement as restoring the broken relationship
between God and humanity, emphasizing healing over legal satisfaction. This
contrasts sharply with PSA’s punitive framework. **2 Corinthians 5:19** asserts,
“In Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting people’s sins
against them” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note highlights reconciliation as
the removal of enmity, not the appeasement of wrath. Likewise, **Romans 5:10**
states, “While we were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of
his Son” (Net Bible), presenting atonement as an act of divine love rather than
a legal requirement.

This model also invites human response, as seen in **2 Corinthians 5:20**: “Be
reconciled to God” (Net Bible), preserving human agency in a way PSA’s
unilateral focus often overlooks. The scope broadens further in **Colossians
1:20**: “[God] made peace through the blood of his cross… whether things on
earth or things in heaven” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note interprets this as
restoring harmony across creation, not merely balancing a divine ledger. PSA’s
preoccupation with individual guilt thus appears limited, failing to embrace
this relational and cosmic vision of redemption.

#### **9.3 Theosis: Deification as Goal**

*Theosis*, prevalent in Eastern Orthodox theology, understands atonement as
enabling humanity to partake in God’s divine nature, prioritizing transformation
over forensic absolution. This is grounded in **2 Peter 1:4**: “[God] has
bestowed on us… that through these things you may become partakers of the divine
nature” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note frames this as relational union with
God, not a legal pardon. Atonement, in this view, encompasses Christ’s
incarnation, death, and resurrection, as seen in **Ephesians 1:7**: “In him we
have redemption through his blood… according to the riches of his grace” (Net
Bible). Redemption here is a gracious gift leading to divine communion, not a
penalty paid.

Athanasius famously articulated this in *On the Incarnation* (ch. 54): “God
became human so that humans might become divine.” PSA, however, often isolates
the cross as the atonement’s crux, sidelining the incarnation and resurrection’s
roles. **Romans 8:11** ties these together: “He who raised Christ from the dead
will also give life to your mortal bodies” (Net Bible), with the Translator’s
Note emphasizing resurrection as a foretaste of divine life. *Theosis* thus
presents a holistic vision, where atonement is a transformative journey toward
union with God, not merely a legal resolution.

This completes **Section 9: Comparison with Other Atonement Theories**, offering
a scholarly critique of PSA through comparison with *Christus Victor*,
*reconciliation*, and *theosis*. Each subsection leverages Net Bible references
to underscore these models’ scriptural depth and theological breadth, accessible
without requiring Greek or Hebrew expertise. If you would like me to proceed to
**Section 10: The Divine Council Worldview**, expand this section, or adjust
based on feedback, please let me know!

Below is **Section 10: The Divine Council Worldview** from our academic paper,
*A Comprehensive Critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement and Reformed
Theology in Pierced for Our Transgressions*. Written at a biblical scholar and
theologian level, this section uses the Net Bible version 2 for scriptural
references and commentary, requiring no knowledge of Greek or Hebrew. It
explores the Divine Council Worldview as an alternative to Penal Substitutionary
Atonement (PSA), reframing atonement in cosmic terms rather than focusing solely
on individual guilt and punishment.

### 10. The Divine Council Worldview

The Divine Council Worldview offers a robust alternative to the individualistic
and punitive framework of Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA), as articulated
in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* (Jeffery, Ovey, & Sach, 2007). While PSA
centers Christ’s death as a legal transaction to appease divine wrath over human
sin, the Divine Council perspective situates atonement within a cosmic narrative
of rebellion and restoration involving both human and supernatural actors. This
section examines the scriptural foundation of this worldview and its
implications for atonement theology, leveraging the Net Bible’s exegesis to
critique PSA’s narrow scope.

#### **10.1 Scriptural Basis**

The Divine Council Worldview is rooted in biblical texts that portray God
presiding over a celestial assembly of divine beings tasked with governing
creation. **Psalm 82:1-2** declares, “God stands in the assembly of El; in the
midst of the gods he renders judgment. He says, ‘How long will you make unjust
legal decisions and show favoritism to the wicked?’” (Net Bible). The
Translator’s Note clarifies that “gods” (*elohim*) likely denotes supernatural
entities rather than human judges, pointing to a cosmic hierarchy. Similarly,
**Deuteronomy 32:8-9** states, “When the Most High gave the nations their
inheritance, when he divided up humankind, he set the boundaries of the peoples,
according to the number of the heavenly assembly” (Net Bible). The Translator’s
Note interprets “heavenly assembly” as divine beings assigned to oversee the
nations, a concept resonant with ancient Near Eastern cosmology.

This cosmic framework extends to the fall, which involves not only human
disobedience but also supernatural rebellion. **Genesis 6:1-4** describes “sons
of God”—identified as divine beings in the Translator’s Note—intermingling with
humans, resulting in widespread corruption. Sin, in this view, disrupts the
divine-human order across creation, implicating both earthly and heavenly
realms. Atonement, therefore, must address this systemic rupture, not merely
individual transgressions, challenging PSA’s emphasis on personal guilt and
punishment.

#### **10.2 Implications for Atonement**

By reframing atonement as a restoration of cosmic order, the Divine Council
Worldview shifts the focus from legal satisfaction to divine victory and
reconciliation. **Ephesians 1:10** encapsulates this scope: “[God’s plan is] to
bring all things together in Christ… whether things on earth or things in
heaven” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note underscores “all things” as
encompassing both human and supernatural domains, aligning with the Divine
Council’s cosmic lens. Christ’s death achieves this restoration by triumphing
over rebellious powers, as **Colossians 2:15** affirms: “He disarmed the rulers
and authorities and made a public disgrace of them, triumphing over them by the
cross” (Net Bible). Here, the “rulers and authorities” are cosmic entities
(Translator’s Note), positioning the cross as a decisive act against
supernatural disorder.

This perspective harmonizes with the *Christus Victor* model, where Christ’s
atonement defeats evil forces and reclaims creation for divine purposes.
**Revelation 5:9-10** illustrates this redemptive scope: “You purchased for God
by your blood people from every tribe… and made them a kingdom and priests to
our God” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note connects this to humanity’s
liberation from cosmic captivity, not merely the satisfaction of divine wrath.
In contrast, PSA’s focus on a transactional resolution of individual sin, as
emphasized in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* (p. 98), risks sidelining
scripture’s broader narrative of cosmic renewal.

The Divine Council Worldview thus challenges PSA’s reductionism, highlighting
atonement as a multifaceted act that restores divine authority, reconciles
humanity, and reorders creation. It invites a theology that transcends punitive
justice, embracing a vision of redemption that reflects God’s sovereignty over
all realms.

**[Pause for Continuation]**

This completes **Section 10: The Divine Council Worldview**, providing a
scholarly critique of PSA through a cosmic lens supported by Net Bible
references. If you would like me to proceed to **Section 11: Undermining
Reformed Theology and TULIP**, expand this section, or adjust based on feedback,
please let me know!

Below is **Section 11: Undermining Reformed Theology and TULIP** from the
academic paper *A Comprehensive Critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement and
Reformed Theology in Pierced for Our Transgressions*. This section is crafted at
a biblical scholar and theologian level, utilizing the Net Bible version 2 for
scriptural references, and does not require readers to know Greek or Hebrew. It
critically examines two key Reformed doctrines—Total Depravity and Limited
Atonement—highlighting their tensions with free will and universal atonement,
respectively. The analysis integrates scriptural exegesis, theological
reflection, and logical critique to challenge the alignment of Penal
Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) with the TULIP framework as presented in
*Pierced for Our Transgressions* (Jeffery, Ovey, & Sach, 2007). The tone remains
scholarly, fair, and precise.

### 11. Undermining Reformed Theology and TULIP

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA), as defended in *Pierced for Our
Transgressions*, is deeply embedded within Reformed theology, particularly the
TULIP doctrines: Total Depravity, Unconditional Election, Limited Atonement,
Irresistible Grace, and Perseverance of the Saints (Jeffery, Ovey, & Sach, 2007,
p. 142). This section critiques two of these doctrines—Total Depravity and
Limited Atonement—arguing that they impose a deterministic framework that
conflicts with scriptural affirmations of human agency and God’s universal
salvific intent. Through exegesis of the Net Bible and theological analysis,
this critique challenges the coherence of PSA’s reliance on TULIP, proposing
that alternative atonement models better reflect the biblical narrative.

#### **11.1 Total Depravity: Overreach Conflicts with Free Will**

Total Depravity asserts that, due to the fall, humanity is wholly incapable of
choosing God or performing good apart from divine regeneration. In *Pierced for
Our Transgressions*, Jeffery, Ovey, and Sach anchor this doctrine in **Ephesians
2:3**: “We too all lived among them in the cravings of our flesh… and were by
nature children of wrath” (Net Bible), interpreting it as evidence of humanity’s
complete moral incapacity (p. 143). While acknowledging the fall’s impact, this
doctrine overextends its implications, undermining the biblical portrayal of
human free will.

Scripture repeatedly affirms human agency in responding to God. **Deuteronomy
30:19** instructs, “Choose life so that you and your descendants may live” (Net
Bible), presenting a clear imperative that presupposes the capacity for choice.
The Translator’s Note emphasizes the active verb “choose,” reinforcing human
responsibility. Likewise, **Joshua 24:15** exhorts, “Choose for yourselves today
whom you will serve” (Net Bible), framing allegiance to God as a deliberate act.
In the New Testament, **Revelation 3:20** depicts Jesus saying, “I stand at the
door and knock. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come in”
(Net Bible), with the Translator’s Note clarifying that “opens” denotes an
intentional human response, not a divine override.

Further, **Romans 2:14-15** challenges Total Depravity’s absolute claim: “When
Gentiles… do by nature the things required by the law… they show the work of the
law written in their hearts” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note suggests that
“by nature” indicates an innate moral capacity, even among those without the
law. This aligns with a theological anthropology where the imago Dei (**Genesis
1:26**) is marred but not eradicated by sin, allowing for responsiveness to
God’s grace. Total Depravity’s overreach thus risks portraying salvation as a
unilateral divine act, diminishing the relational dynamics central to atonement
models like reconciliation, where mutual participation is key (cf. **2
Corinthians 5:19**).

#### **11.2 Limited Atonement: Exclusionary vs. Universal Scope**

Limited Atonement posits that Christ’s death was intended solely for the elect,
not all humanity. In *Pierced for Our Transgressions*, this is supported by
**John 10:15**—“I lay down my life for the sheep” (Net Bible)—interpreted as
restricting atonement to a predetermined group (p. 145). Yet, this exclusionary
stance contradicts the broader scriptural witness to a universal atonement.

**1 John 2:2** directly refutes this limitation: “He is the atoning sacrifice
for our sins, and not only for ours but also for the whole world” (Net Bible).
The Translator’s Note confirms that “whole world” encompasses all humanity, not
a select few. Similarly, **John 3:16** declares, “God so loved the world that he
gave his only Son” (Net Bible), with “world” signaling universal scope. **2
Peter 3:9** reinforces this: “[God] is patient… not wanting any to perish but
all to come to repentance” (Net Bible), where the Translator’s Note underscores
“any” and “all” as inclusive terms. Additionally, **1 Timothy 2:4** states,
“[God] wants all people to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth”
(Net Bible), aligning with **Acts 10:34**—“God shows no partiality” (Net
Bible)—to affirm divine impartiality.

Limited Atonement’s restrictive view thus clashes with scripture’s universal
horizon, portraying God as selective rather than graciously inclusive. PSA’s
dependence on this doctrine narrows the atonement’s purpose to a legal
transaction for the elect, sidelining the cosmic and relational breadth evident
in passages like **Colossians 1:20**: “[God] made peace through the blood of his
cross… whether things on earth or things in heaven” (Net Bible).

#### **Theological Reflection**

The TULIP framework, particularly Total Depravity and Limited Atonement, imposes
a deterministic theology that underpins PSA’s punitive focus. Total Depravity
reduces human beings to passive recipients, while Limited Atonement confines
God’s love to a subset of humanity, both of which strain against scripture’s
relational and inclusive emphases. Alternative atonement models—such as
*Christus Victor*, which celebrates Christ’s triumph over evil (**Colossians
2:15**), or *theosis*, which envisions participation in divine life (**2 Peter
1:4**)—preserve human agency and God’s universal intent. **Ephesians 2:8-9**—“By
grace you have been saved through faith” (Net Bible)—balances divine initiative
with human response, offering a more holistic vision than PSA’s TULIP-aligned
legalism.

**[Pause for Continuation]**

This completes **Section 11: Undermining Reformed Theology and TULIP**,
providing a rigorous critique of Total Depravity and Limited Atonement with Net
Bible references and theological insight. If you would like me to proceed to
**Section 12: A Holistic Atonement Theology**, expand this section, or adjust
based on feedback, please let me know!

Below is **Section 12: A Holistic Atonement Theology** from our academic paper,
*A Comprehensive Critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement and Reformed
Theology in Pierced for Our Transgressions*. Written at a biblical scholar and
theologian level, this section uses the Net Bible version 2 for scriptural
references and commentary, ensuring accessibility without requiring knowledge of
Greek or Hebrew. It proposes a comprehensive atonement theology that integrates
*Christus Victor*, *theosis*, and *reconciliation*, emphasizing free will,
relational restoration, and cosmic renewal over the legalistic framework of
Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) as presented in *Pierced for Our
Transgressions* (Jeffery, Ovey, & Sach, 2007).

### 12. A Holistic Atonement Theology

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) posits Christ’s death as a legal
transaction to appease divine wrath and satisfy justice, a view strongly
defended in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* (p. 33: “The doctrine of penal
substitution stands at the heart of the atonement”). While PSA captures elements
of sin’s seriousness, it often narrows atonement to a punitive act, sidelining
the broader biblical themes of cosmic renewal, relational healing, and human
participation. This section articulates a holistic atonement theology that
synthesizes *Christus Victor* (victory over evil), *theosis* (transformation
into divine likeness), and *reconciliation* (restoration of relationships).
Grounded in scripture, this integrative model offers a richer alternative to
PSA, aligning with the Bible’s multifaceted portrayal of redemption.

#### **12.1 Synthesis of Christus Victor, Theosis, and Reconciliation**

This holistic theology weaves together three biblical atonement perspectives,
each illuminating a distinct yet interconnected facet of Christ’s work:

-   **Christus Victor**: Christ’s death and resurrection achieve a decisive
    victory over sin, death, and evil powers. **Colossians 2:15** declares, “He
    disarmed the rulers and authorities and made a public disgrace of them,
    triumphing over them by the cross” (Net Bible). The Translator’s Note
    explains “disarmed” as stripping these powers of authority, portraying the
    cross as a cosmic triumph, not a courtroom settlement. Similarly, **Hebrews
    2:14-15** states, “Through death he could destroy the one who holds the
    power of death… and free those who were held in slavery” (Net Bible),
    emphasizing liberation over punishment.

-   **Theosis**: Drawing from Eastern Orthodox thought, *theosis* sees atonement
    as enabling humanity to share in God’s divine nature. **2 Peter 1:4**
    affirms, “[God] has bestowed on us… that through these things you may become
    partakers of the divine nature” (Net Bible), with the Translator’s Note
    describing this as a transformative union, not a mere legal acquittal. This
    transformation unfolds through Christ’s life, death, and resurrection, as
    **Romans 8:29** reveals: “He also predestined [us] to be conformed to the
    image of his Son” (Net Bible), pointing to a progressive restoration of
    divine likeness.

-   **Reconciliation**: This model focuses on restoring broken relationships
    between God and humanity, and within creation. **2 Corinthians 5:19**
    states, “In Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting
    people’s sins against them” (Net Bible), with the Translator’s Note
    highlighting the removal of hostility rather than a transactional exchange.
    This reconciliation extends cosmically, as **Colossians 1:20** asserts:
    “[God] made peace through the blood of his cross… whether things on earth or
    things in heaven” (Net Bible), emphasizing restored harmony across all
    creation.

These perspectives converge to present atonement as a dynamic process: Christ’s
victory (*Christus Victor*) dismantles the barriers of sin and evil, opening the
way for humanity’s transformation (*theosis*) and the healing of relationships
(*reconciliation*). Unlike PSA’s focus on legal satisfaction, this synthesis
reflects the Bible’s expansive vision of redemption, integrating Christ’s work
into a unified narrative of liberation and renewal.

#### **12.2 Free Will and Restoration**

A holistic atonement theology upholds human agency and supernatural renewal,
contrasting with PSA’s alignment with Reformed doctrines like Total Depravity
and Limited Atonement, which diminish human response. This approach frames
salvation as a cooperative endeavor between God and humanity, rooted in
scripture’s call to active participation.

-   **Human Agency**: Scripture portrays salvation as requiring a free response.
    **Revelation 3:20** illustrates this: “I stand at the door and knock. If
    anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come in” (Net Bible), with
    the Translator’s Note underscoring the voluntary act of opening the door.
    Likewise, **Romans 10:9** states, “If you confess with your mouth… and
    believe in your heart… you will be saved” (Net Bible), presenting confession
    and belief as deliberate choices. Atonement, here, is an invitation to
    partnership, not a unilateral imposition.

-   **Supernatural Renewal**: Beyond human effort, the Holy Spirit empowers
    transformation and cosmic restoration. **Titus 3:5** explains, “[God] saved
    us… by the washing of regeneration and renewal in the Holy Spirit” (Net
    Bible), with the Translator’s Note tying “regeneration” to the concept of
    new creation. This renewal encompasses all things, as **Romans 8:21**
    envisions: “The creation itself will also be set free from the bondage of
    decay” (Net Bible). PSA’s emphasis on legal pardon often overlooks this
    broader scope of supernatural renewal.

By integrating Christ’s triumph, humanity’s transformation, and relational
restoration, this holistic theology preserves free will and highlights the
Spirit’s renewing work. It challenges PSA’s reduction of atonement to a legal
fix, offering instead a framework that embraces scripture’s full redemptive
vision.

**[Pause for Continuation]**

This completes **Section 12: A Holistic Atonement Theology**, synthesizing
*Christus Victor*, *theosis*, and *reconciliation* while emphasizing human
agency and cosmic renewal. Written at a scholarly level with Net Bible
references, it remains accessible without requiring Greek or Hebrew knowledge.
Please let me know if you would like me to proceed to **Section 13:
Conclusion**, revisit earlier sections based on the TOC, or adjust this section
further!

Below is the response to your query, crafted at a biblical scholar and
theologian level, yet accessible without requiring knowledge of Greek or Hebrew.
I have written Section 13: Conclusion as requested, synthesizing the paper’s
critique of Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) and advocating for a holistic
atonement theology. The response aligns with the Table of Contents (TOC) and the
thinking trace provided, maintaining a scholarly tone while pausing before any
character limit to prompt for continuation.

### 13. Conclusion: Beyond PSA—A Call for a Holistic, Relational Atonement

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA), as articulated in *Pierced for Our
Transgressions* by Steve Jeffery, Michael Ovey, and Andrew Sach (2007),
positions itself as the cornerstone of Christ’s redemptive work, asserting that
it “stands at the heart of the atonement” (p. 33). This paper, however, has
systematically challenged that claim, revealing PSA’s theological, scriptural,
and ethical limitations through a comprehensive critique rooted in exegesis,
historical analysis, philosophical reflection, and ethical evaluation. Far from
being the definitive model, PSA’s legalistic and punitive framework—tightly
interwoven with Reformed theology’s TULIP doctrines—distorts the multifaceted
nature of biblical atonement. In its place, this study advocates for a holistic
theology that integrates *Christus Victor*, *theosis*, and *reconciliation*,
emphasizing relational restoration, human agency, and cosmic renewal over a
narrow focus on divine wrath and retribution.

#### **Summary of PSA’s Shortcomings**

The critique of PSA unfolded across multiple dimensions, each exposing flaws
that undermine its dominance:

1.  **Scriptural Selectivity**: PSA leans heavily on texts like Romans 3:25 and
    Isaiah 53:5, interpreting them through a lens of divine wrath and
    punishment. Yet, these passages allow for broader readings—Romans 3:25 can
    suggest a “mercy seat” or expiation rather than wrath appeasement, and
    Isaiah 53:5’s “punishment” may imply corrective discipline rather than penal
    suffering (Net Bible Translator’s Notes). PSA’s focus sidelines scripture’s
    rich tapestry of cosmic victory (Colossians 1:20) and relational healing (2
    Corinthians 5:19).

2.  **Historical Roots**: Far from being a timeless doctrine, PSA emerged from
    specific cultural contexts—Anselm’s medieval satisfaction theory, shaped by
    feudal justice, and Calvin’s Reformation-era legalism. The early church, by
    contrast, embraced diverse models like *Christus Victor* and *theosis*,
    casting doubt on PSA’s claim to primacy and highlighting its historical
    contingency.

3.  **Philosophical and Ethical Weaknesses**: PSA’s reliance on retributive
    justice portrays God as compelled to punish, raising tensions with divine
    love and omnipotence. Critics from feminist and liberation theology
    perspectives argue that it risks glorifying violence and sidelining systemic
    injustice, while its transactional nature diminishes human responsibility
    and relational depth.

4.  **Reformed Constraints**: PSA’s alignment with Total Depravity and Limited
    Atonement reflects a deterministic theology that clashes with biblical
    affirmations of free will (Deuteronomy 30:19) and universal redemption (1
    John 2:2). This reduces atonement to a legal remedy for a select few, rather
    than a transformative invitation for all.

5.  

#### **A Holistic Alternative**

In response to these deficiencies, this paper proposes a holistic atonement
theology that weaves together three complementary strands:

-   **Christus Victor**: Christ’s death and resurrection triumph over the powers
    of sin, death, and evil (Colossians 2:15), framing atonement as a cosmic
    liberation rather than a courtroom settlement.

-   **Theosis**: Humanity is invited to participate in God’s nature (2 Peter
    1:4), emphasizing transformation and union with the divine over mere
    acquittal.

-   **Reconciliation**: Atonement restores broken relationships between God,
    humanity, and creation (2 Corinthians 5:19), prioritizing healing over
    punishment.

This integrated model upholds human agency—evident in Christ’s call to open the
door (Revelation 3:20)—and reflects scripture’s vision of supernatural renewal
(Titus 3:5). It offers a redemption narrative that encompasses victory,
transformation, and restoration, transcending PSA’s punitive boundaries.

#### **A Call Forward**

The critique of PSA in *Pierced for Our Transgressions* is not merely a
rejection of one theory but an invitation to reimagine atonement theology. By
moving beyond a legalistic focus, we align more closely with the Bible’s
overarching story of a God who liberates, transforms, and reconciles. This
holistic approach not only addresses PSA’s shortcomings but also resonates with
the relational heart of the gospel, offering a theology that is scripturally
robust, historically informed, and ethically compelling.

This conclusion is complete within the scope of Section 13 as outlined in your
TOC. I have paused here to ensure I remain within any potential character
limits. If you would like me to expand further, revisit earlier sections, or
proceed to another part of the paper, please let me know where to start next,
referencing the TOC as needed!

## Appendix 1: Analysis of John Piper’s Foreword in *Pierced for Our Transgressions*

In his Foreword to *Pierced for Our Transgressions*, John Piper mounts a fervent
defense of Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA), portraying it as the linchpin
of the gospel. As a prominent Calvinistic-Reformed theologian, Piper’s theology
is steeped in the TULIP framework—Total Depravity, Unconditional Election,
Limited Atonement, Irresistible Grace, and Perseverance of the Saints—which
shapes his view of God’s wrath, human sinfulness, and Christ’s redemptive work.
This analysis dissects Piper’s scriptural citations and theological assertions,
providing exegesis, alternative interpretations, and counterarguments from other
atonement models. Through this, we explore the strengths and weaknesses of PSA
within Piper’s framework, advocating for a broader understanding of Christ’s
atonement.

### 1. Piper’s Defense of PSA: Scriptural and Theological Foundations

Piper’s argument hinges on scriptural texts interpreted through a lens of divine
wrath and justice, alongside theological themes rooted in his Reformed
tradition. Below, we analyze his cited passages and core claims.

#### **Scriptural Analysis**

Piper marshals several verses to argue that Christ’s death substitutes for
humanity’s punishment under God’s wrath. Each is examined with exegesis from the
Net Bible, followed by alternative readings.

##### **John 3:36 – Wrath and Belief**

-   **Text**: “Whoever believes in the Son has eternal life; whoever does not
    obey the Son will not see life, but the wrath of God remains on him” (Net
    Bible).

-   **Piper’s Interpretation**: Piper stresses “remains” to assert that wrath is
    a default state for unbelievers, which Christ’s death removes for the
    faithful.

-   **Exegesis**: The Greek *menei* (“remains”) indicates continuity (Net Bible
    Translator’s Note), but wrath’s nature is unspecified. It could denote
    separation from God rather than active punishment. **Romans 6:23**—“The
    payoff of sin is death” (Net Bible)—frames death as sin’s consequence, not a
    judicial penalty.

-   **Alternative Model**: *Reconciliation* sees wrath as relational
    estrangement. **2 Corinthians 5:19**—“God was reconciling the world to
    himself in Christ” (Net Bible)—emphasizes restoration, not wrath
    satisfaction.

##### **1.1.2 Ephesians 2:3 – Children of Wrath**

-   **Text**: “We too all lived among them in the cravings of our flesh… and
    were by nature children of wrath, like the rest of mankind” (Net Bible).

-   **Piper’s Interpretation**: Piper links this to Total Depravity, arguing
    humanity’s nature merits wrath, which Christ absorbs.

-   **Exegesis**: “Children of wrath” may mean “deserving wrath” (Translator’s
    Note), but **Ephesians 2:4-5** shifts focus: “But God, being rich in mercy…
    made us alive together with Christ” (Net Bible). Mercy, not wrath
    appeasement, drives salvation.

-   **Alternative Model**: *Theosis* views this as a call to renewal.
    **Ephesians 4:24**—“put on the new self, created to be like God” (Net
    Bible)—suggests transformation, not substitution.

##### **1.1.3 2 Thessalonians 1:8-9 – Eternal Destruction**

-   **Text**: “…who will suffer the punishment of eternal destruction, away from
    the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power” (Net Bible).

-   **Piper’s Interpretation**: Piper uses this to depict wrath’s severity, with
    Christ as the substitute for this fate.

-   **Exegesis**: “Eternal destruction” (*olethron aiōnion*) means exclusion
    from God’s presence (Translator’s Note), not necessarily punitive torment.
    **Matthew 25:41**—“eternal fire prepared for the devil” (Net Bible)—suggests
    banishment, not wrath inflicted.

-   **Alternative Model**: *Christus Victor* frames Christ’s death as victory
    over evil. **Hebrews 2:14**—“through death he could destroy the one who
    holds the power of death” (Net Bible)—highlights liberation.

##### **1.1.4 Ephesians 2:1-2 – Dead in Sin**

-   **Text**: “And although you were dead in your trespasses and sins… following
    the ruler of the power of the air” (Net Bible).

-   **Piper’s Interpretation**: Piper ties this to human depravity,
    necessitating Christ’s substitutionary death.

-   **Exegesis**: “Dead” (*nekrous*) signifies spiritual separation
    (Translator’s Note), not a legal debt. **Ephesians 2:5**—“made us alive
    together with Christ” (Net Bible)—centers on resurrection, not penalty
    payment.

-   **Alternative Model**: *Ransom* sees Christ freeing humanity from sin’s
    power. **1 Peter 1:18-19**—“redeemed… with the precious blood of Christ”
    (Net Bible)—emphasizes liberation.

##### **1.1.5 Ephesians 5:6 – Wrath on Disobedience**

-   **Text**: “because of these things the wrath of God comes on the sons of
    disobedience” (Net Bible).

-   **Piper’s Interpretation**: Piper views this as divine justice requiring
    Christ’s substitution.

-   **Exegesis**: “Comes” (*erchetai*) links wrath to sin’s consequences
    (Translator’s Note), not a demand for punishment. **Colossians 3:6** echoes
    this, but **John 16:8**—“the Spirit will convict the world about sin” (Net
    Bible)—suggests correction, not retribution.

-   **Alternative Model**: *Moral Influence* interprets Christ’s death as
    transformative love. **1 Peter 2:21**—“Christ suffered for you, leaving an
    example” (Net Bible)—prioritizes ethical impact.

##### **1.1.6 Galatians 4:4 – Adoption through Redemption**

-   **Text**: “But when the fullness of time came, God sent his Son… to redeem
    those under the law, so that we might receive adoption as sons” (Net Bible).

-   **Piper’s Interpretation**: Piper sees redemption as rescue from wrath,
    enabling adoption.

-   **Exegesis**: *Exagorazō* (“redeem”) means “to buy back” (Translator’s
    Note), suggesting liberation from bondage, not payment to God. **Galatians
    4:5** focuses on sonship, not wrath.

-   **Alternative Model**: *Reconciliation* emphasizes relational restoration.
    **Romans 8:15**—“the Spirit of adoption” (Net Bible)—underscores belonging.

##### **1.1.7 Galatians 3:13 – Becoming a Curse**

-   **Text**: “Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse
    for us… ‘Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree’” (Net Bible).

-   **Piper’s Interpretation**: Piper argues Christ bore the law’s penalty,
    satisfying justice.

-   **Exegesis**: “Becoming a curse” reflects **Deuteronomy 21:23**’s shame
    (Translator’s Note), not divine wrath. **Galatians 3:14**—“the blessing of
    Abraham” (Net Bible)—highlights inclusion, not appeasement.

-   **Alternative Model**: *Ransom* views this as liberation from the curse.
    **Mark 10:45**—“to give his life as a ransom for many” (Net Bible)—supports
    this.

##### **1.1.8 1 Corinthians 1:23-24 – Stumbling Block and Power**

-   **Text**: “We preach Christ crucified, a stumbling block to Jews and
    foolishness to Gentiles, but to those who are called… the power of God and
    the wisdom of God” (Net Bible).

-   **Piper’s Interpretation**: Piper defends PSA’s scandal as divine wisdom.

-   **Exegesis**: “Stumbling block” (*skandalon*) reflects its countercultural
    nature (Translator’s Note), not proof of PSA. **1 Corinthians 1:18**—“the
    word of the cross is… the power of God” (Net Bible)—is broader than
    substitution.

-   **Alternative Model**: *Christus Victor* sees the cross as triumph.
    **Colossians 2:15**—“disarmed the rulers and authorities” (Net Bible)—fits
    this.

##### **1.1.9 Romans 8:15 – Spirit of Sonship**

-   **Text**: “You received the Spirit of adoption, by whom we cry, ‘Abba,
    Father’” (Net Bible).

-   **Piper’s Interpretation**: Piper ties this to wrath’s removal via PSA.

-   **Exegesis**: “Adoption” (*huiothesia*) emphasizes relationship
    (Translator’s Note), not legal satisfaction. **Romans 8:1**—“no
    condemnation” (Net Bible)—focuses on freedom.

-   **Alternative Model**: *Theosis* links this to transformation. **2 Peter
    1:4**—“partakers of the divine nature” (Net Bible)—extends adoption.

##### **1.1.10 Romans 12:19-20 – Vengeance and Enemy Love**

-   **Text**: “Never avenge yourselves, but leave it to the wrath of God… ‘If
    your enemy is hungry, feed him’” (Net Bible).

-   **Piper’s Interpretation**: Piper argues wrath undergirds enemy love,
    satisfied by PSA.

-   **Exegesis**: “Leave it” (*dote topon*) trusts God’s justice (Translator’s
    Note), not retribution. **Luke 6:35**—“love your enemies” (Net
    Bible)—mirrors God’s mercy.

-   **Alternative Model**: *Moral Influence* sees the cross as love’s example.
    **Romans 5:8**—“while we were sinners, Christ died for us” (Net
    Bible)—inspires emulation.

#### **1.2 Theological Themes in Piper’s Defense**

Piper’s PSA rests on divine wrath and TULIP’s influence:

-   **Wrath as Essential**: Piper insists wrath requires satisfaction, citing
    **Ephesians 5:6**. Yet, wrath often denotes consequences (Translator’s
    Note), not a punitive attribute needing appeasement.

-   **TULIP’s Role**: Total Depravity (**Ephesians 2:3**) assumes universal
    guilt, ignoring choice (**Joshua 24:15**—“choose… whom you will serve” [Net
    Bible]). Limited Atonement (**John 10:15**) clashes with **1 Timothy
    2:4**—“God wants all people to be saved” (Net Bible).

### 2. Counterarguments from Alternative Atonement Models

Alternative models challenge PSA’s punitive focus, offering scriptural
grounding:

-   **Christus Victor**: Christ defeats evil powers. **1 John 3:8**—“to destroy
    the works of the devil” (Net Bible)—prioritizes victory.

-   **Reconciliation**: Atonement restores relationships. **Romans
    5:10**—“reconciled to God through the death of his Son” (Net Bible)—centers
    on love.

-   **Theosis**: Salvation transforms humanity. **2 Corinthians
    3:18**—“transformed into the same image” (Net Bible)—emphasizes renewal.

-   **Moral Influence**: The cross exemplifies love. **1 Peter 2:21**—“leaving
    an example” (Net Bible)—inspires change.

These models reveal PSA’s limitations, particularly its legalistic slant.

### Conclusion

Piper’s Foreword champions PSA through a Calvinistic-Reformed lens, rooted in
TULIP and a wrath-centric reading of texts like **John 3:36** and **Galatians
3:13**. Exegesis, however, supports alternative interpretations, and critiques
of TULIP’s determinism and exclusivity highlight PSA’s constraints. A holistic
atonement theology, integrating *Christus Victor*, *reconciliation*, and other
models, better captures the richness of Christ’s work.
