Table of Contents

[A Comprehensive Critique and Defense of Reformed Theology’s Use of Old
Testament Sacrifices in Penal Substitutionary Atonement: With a Focus on the
Passover](#a-comprehensive-critique-and-defense-of-reformed-theologys-use-of-old-testament-sacrifices-in-penal-substitutionary-atonement-with-a-focus-on-the-passover)

[Introduction](#_Toc191461192)

[Critique: The Complexity of Old Testament Sacrifices and the Passover
Disconnect](#_Toc191461193)

[Reformed/PSA Counterargument: Typology and Theological
Coherence](#_Toc191461194)

[Weighing Both Sides: A Balanced Assessment](#_Toc191461195)

[Conclusion: Toward a Holistic Atonement Theology](#_Toc191461196)

## A Comprehensive Critique and Defense of Reformed Theology’s Use of Old Testament Sacrifices in Penal Substitutionary Atonement: With a Focus on the Passover

### Introduction

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) is a foundational doctrine in Reformed
theology, asserting that Jesus Christ’s death on the cross served as a
substitutionary sacrifice, bearing the punishment for humanity’s sins to satisfy
divine justice and reconcile sinners to God. A key pillar of this doctrine is
its reliance on Old Testament sacrificial practices, which Reformed theologians
interpret as prefiguring Christ’s penal substitutionary death. Among these, the
Passover sacrifice is frequently cited as a typological precursor to Christ’s
atonement. However, critics argue that this interpretation oversimplifies and
distorts the diverse purposes and contexts of Old Testament sacrifices,
including the Passover, which do not align neatly with PSA’s penal framework.
This paper critically examines Reformed theology’s use of Old Testament
sacrifices, with an in-depth focus on the Passover, to argue that PSA’s reliance
on these rituals is selective and contextually problematic. Following this
critique, a robust counterargument from the Reformed/PSA perspective is
presented, emphasizing their typological and theological framework. Finally,
both sides are weighed equally, highlighting strengths, weaknesses, and the need
for ongoing theological dialogue.

### Critique: The Complexity of Old Testament Sacrifices and the Passover Disconnect

#### The Diverse Purposes of Old Testament Sacrifices

The Old Testament sacrificial system, detailed primarily in Leviticus and
Exodus, is a multifaceted institution that resists reduction to a single
purpose, such as penal substitution. These sacrifices served a variety of roles
within Israelite life and worship, including:

-   **Burnt Offerings (Olah)**: Described in Leviticus 1, these voluntary
    offerings involved burning an entire animal as an act of worship, devotion,
    or supplication. They symbolized complete surrender to God, not atonement
    for sin or punishment transfer (e.g., Noah’s offering in Genesis 8:20-21).

-   **Grain Offerings (Minchah)**: Leviticus 2 outlines these non-blood
    offerings of flour or bread, often presented with oil and frankincense, as
    acts of thanksgiving or allegiance. Their lack of blood underscores that not
    all sacrifices were tied to sin or penalty.

-   **Peace Offerings (Shelamim)**: Leviticus 3 describes these communal
    sacrifices, where an animal’s meat was shared among the offerer, priests,
    and God, celebrating fellowship, gratitude, or covenant renewal (e.g.,
    Leviticus 7:11-18). Their focus was relational harmony, not retribution.

-   **Sin Offerings (Chatat)**: Leviticus 4-5 mandates these offerings for
    unintentional sins or ritual impurities, with the type of animal varying by
    the offerer’s status (bulls for priests, goats or lambs for individuals).
    The emphasis was on purification and covenant restoration, not punishment of
    a substitute.

-   **Guilt Offerings (Asham)**: Required for specific sins involving
    restitution (Leviticus 5:14-6:7), these offerings combined sacrifice with
    compensation, focusing on repairing breaches in relationships rather than
    satisfying wrath.

This diversity reveals that sin atonement was just one aspect of a broader
system encompassing worship, thanksgiving, purification, and community. PSA’s
tendency to emphasize sin-related sacrifices while sidelining others risks
misrepresenting the holistic nature of Israelite worship.

#### The Multifaceted Symbolism of Blood

Blood is central to many Old Testament sacrifices, but its meaning extends
beyond the penal framework of PSA. Leviticus 17:11 states, “For the life of a
creature is in the blood, and I have given it to you to make atonement for
yourselves on the altar; it is the blood that makes atonement for one’s life.”
PSA interprets this as blood satisfying divine justice through penalty payment,
but the biblical text suggests richer symbolism:

-   **Purification**: Blood cleansed people and objects from defilement, as in
    the consecration of priests (Exodus 29:20-21) or the sprinkling of blood in
    sin offerings (Leviticus 4:6-7). This purification restored holiness, not
    paid a debt.

-   **Covenant Ratification**: In Exodus 24:6-8, Moses sprinkled blood on the
    people to seal the covenant, symbolizing shared life and commitment, not
    punishment.

-   **Life Dedication**: Leviticus 17:11 ties blood to life, suggesting that
    offering blood to God was an act of consecrating life to Him, restoring
    relationship rather than appeasing wrath.

This multifaceted symbolism—purification, covenant, life—challenges PSA’s narrow
focus on blood as a punitive substitute, indicating a more relational and
restorative role.

#### The Passover Sacrifice: Deliverance, Not Penal Substitution

The Passover, detailed in Exodus 12, is a pivotal Old Testament ritual often
cited by PSA proponents as prefiguring Christ’s atonement. On the night of the
Exodus, each Israelite household slaughtered a lamb and applied its blood to
their doorposts and lintels. This act protected them from the angel of death,
who struck the Egyptian firstborn but “passed over” the marked homes (Exodus
12:12-13, 23). Several key features of the Passover undermine its alignment with
PSA:

-   **Purpose of Deliverance**: The Passover was fundamentally about divine
    protection and liberation from slavery in Egypt. The blood served as a sign
    of God’s covenantal faithfulness, distinguishing the Israelites for mercy
    (Exodus 12:13: “When I see the blood, I will pass over you”). It was not
    offered to atone for sins or bear punishment.

-   **Absence of Sin Atonement**: Unlike sin or guilt offerings, the Passover
    lamb was not linked to confession, forgiveness, or ritual impurity. Its
    slaughter occurred in homes, not at an altar, and the focus was on the
    communal meal that followed (Exodus 12:8-11), symbolizing unity and
    preparation for exodus, not penalty payment.

-   **Blood as a Marker**: The application of blood to doorposts was a
    protective sign, not a substitutionary act. It identified the Israelites as
    God’s people under His mercy, contrasting with the judgment on Egypt. No
    transfer of punishment to the lamb is implied; the lamb’s death enabled the
    ritual, but the emphasis is on God’s sparing action.

The New Testament connects Christ to the Passover lamb, notably in 1 Corinthians
5:7 (“For Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed”) and John 1:29
(“Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world”). However, this
imagery emphasizes liberation from sin’s bondage and redemption through grace,
akin to Israel’s deliverance from Egypt, rather than a penal transaction. For
example, in 1 Peter 1:18-19, Christ’s blood ransoms believers “from the empty
way of life,” echoing exodus themes over punishment. Thus, while the
Passover-Christ connection is profound, it aligns more with redemption and
protection than with PSA’s framework of wrath satisfaction.

#### Broader Examples: Day of Atonement and Beyond

To deepen the critique, consider the Day of Atonement (Leviticus 16), another
ritual PSA links to penal substitution. Two goats were involved: one sacrificed
to purify the sanctuary from the people’s sins, its blood sprinkled to cleanse
(Leviticus 16:15-19), and the scapegoat sent into the wilderness bearing the
community’s iniquities (Leviticus 16:21-22). PSA sees this as Christ dying for
sin (sacrificed goat) and removing it (scapegoat). Yet:

-   The sacrificed goat’s blood purified sacred spaces, not paid a penalty in
    place of the people.

-   The scapegoat, bearing sin, was not killed or punished but released,
    undermining the idea of a substitute suffering wrath.

Similarly, the covenant renewal in Exodus 24:6-8, where blood sealed the
relationship between God and Israel, lacks any punitive element. These examples
reinforce that Old Testament atonement rituals focused on purification,
restoration, and covenant, not penal substitution.

#### Theological and Ethical Implications

Reformed theology’s reliance on a penal reading of these sacrifices introduces
theological tensions:

-   **God’s Character**: PSA portrays God as requiring punishment to forgive,
    potentially overshadowing His mercy (e.g., Hosea 6:6: “I desire mercy, not
    sacrifice”). Instances like Nineveh’s forgiveness in Jonah 3:10, without
    sacrifice, challenge this necessity.

-   **Atonement’s Breadth**: By prioritizing penalty, PSA marginalizes other
    biblical atonement motifs—ransom (Mark 10:45), reconciliation (2 Corinthians
    5:19), or victory over evil (Colossians 2:15)—reducing Christ’s work to a
    legal act.

-   **Ethical Concerns**: The notion of punishing an innocent substitute
    (Christ) for the guilty raises questions about divine justice, conflicting
    with biblical calls for personal accountability (Ezekiel 18:20).

This selective use of Old Testament sacrifices thus risks distorting Scripture
and God’s nature, misleading believers about atonement’s richness.

### Reformed/PSA Counterargument: Typology and Theological Coherence

Reformed theology offers a robust defense of PSA, arguing that Old Testament
sacrifices, including the Passover, are divinely designed types pointing to
Christ’s penal substitutionary death. This perspective emphasizes biblical
continuity, New Testament reinterpretation, and theological necessity.

#### Typological Fulfillment

Reformed theologians view Old Testament sacrifices as shadows of Christ’s
ultimate sacrifice, a concept rooted in Hebrews 10:1: “The law is only a shadow
of the good things that are coming.” The diversity of sacrifices reflects
various facets of Christ’s work:

-   Burnt offerings prefigure His total obedience (Philippians 2:8).

-   Peace offerings anticipate reconciliation through His blood (Ephesians
    2:14-16).

-   Sin offerings foreshadow His atonement for sin (Hebrews 9:26-28).

The Passover fits this typology: though originally about deliverance, its lamb
prefigures Christ, whose death delivers from sin’s penalty. Hebrews 9-10
portrays Christ as the high priest offering Himself, fulfilling the temporary
Old Testament system with an eternal sacrifice.

#### The Passover as a Penal Prefiguration

Reformed thinkers argue that the New Testament reframes the Passover in penal
terms. In 1 Corinthians 5:7, Paul calls Christ “our Passover lamb,” implying His
death absorbs divine judgment, as the lamb’s blood averted death in Egypt. John
19:36 connects Jesus’ unbroken bones to the Passover lamb (Exodus 12:46),
reinforcing this link. While the original Passover focused on protection, the
judgment on Egypt’s firstborn suggests a wrath-bearing element that Christ
fulfills by bearing God’s wrath for humanity (Romans 5:9: “saved from God’s
wrath through him”). Thus, the Passover’s deeper meaning, revealed in Christ,
includes penal substitution.

#### Blood and Divine Justice

Hebrews 9:22—“Without the shedding of blood, there is no
forgiveness”—underscores blood’s necessity for atonement, which Reformed
theology ties to satisfying divine justice. Leviticus 17:11’s “atonement by
blood” prefigures Christ’s blood as the ultimate payment (1 Peter 1:18-19). The
Passover lamb’s blood, protecting from death, typifies Christ’s blood shielding
believers from eternal judgment, aligning with PSA’s emphasis on propitiation
(Romans 3:25).

#### Theological Necessity

PSA provides a coherent framework for reconciling God’s justice and mercy.
Habakkuk 1:13 (“Your eyes are too pure to look on evil”) and Romans 6:23 (“The
wages of sin is death”) establish sin’s penalty, which Christ bears (Isaiah
53:5: “He was pierced for our transgressions”). This substitution allows God to
be “just and the justifier” (Romans 3:26), upholding holiness while forgiving
sinners. The Passover’s deliverance is thus elevated in Christ to deliverance
from sin’s ultimate consequence.

#### New Testament Authority

The Reformed position leans heavily on New Testament reinterpretation, where
inspired authors unveil Old Testament rituals’ fuller significance. Critics may
focus on original context, but Hebrews and Paul reveal a divine intent beneath
the surface, linking sacrifices to Christ’s penal death.

### Weighing Both Sides: A Balanced Assessment

#### Strengths of the Critique

-   **Historical Context**: The critique respects the original purposes of
    sacrifices—worship, purification, deliverance—avoiding anachronistic
    imposition of PSA. The Passover’s focus on protection and covenant aligns
    with its Exodus narrative.

-   **Symbolic Depth**: Highlighting blood’s roles (purification, covenant,
    life) preserves its biblical richness, resisting reduction to punishment.

-   **Theological Nuance**: Raising concerns about God’s character and
    atonement’s scope encourages a broader, more holistic theology.

#### Weaknesses of the Critique

-   **Underplaying Typology**: The critique may undervalue typology, a biblical
    method where Old Testament events prefigure Christ (e.g., Colossians 2:17).
    The New Testament’s Passover-Christ link suggests a deeper intent.

-   **New Testament Evidence**: Dismissing penal elements overlooks texts like
    Romans 3:25 and Hebrews 9:28, which frame Christ’s death as bearing sin’s
    penalty.

#### Strengths of the Reformed/PSA Position

-   **Scriptural Unity**: Typology unites the Testaments, seeing Christ as the
    fulfillment of God’s redemptive plan (Luke 24:27).

-   **Clarity on Justice**: PSA explains how a holy God forgives without
    compromising righteousness, resonating with texts like Isaiah 53.

-   **Biblical Support**: New Testament passages explicitly tie Christ’s death
    to sacrifice and propitiation, grounding PSA in apostolic teaching.

#### Weaknesses of the Reformed/PSA Position

-   **Contextual Selectivity**: Focusing on sin-related sacrifices and
    reinterpreting the Passover risks neglecting non-penal rituals, skewing the
    system’s diversity.

-   **Wrath Emphasis**: Overemphasizing punishment may overshadow mercy and
    other atonement themes, narrowing Christ’s work.

-   **Historical Debate**: Early church fathers like Athanasius emphasized
    victory over death (Incarnation) over penal substitution, suggesting PSA is
    not the sole biblical view.

### Conclusion: Toward a Holistic Atonement Theology

The debate over Reformed theology’s use of Old Testament sacrifices,
particularly the Passover, in PSA reveals profound interpretive challenges. The
critique underscores the sacrifices’ diverse purposes and the Passover’s
deliverance focus, questioning PSA’s punitive lens. The Reformed counterargument
defends a typological reading, seeing Christ’s penal death as fulfilling these
rituals, supported by New Testament revelation.

Both perspectives enrich the discussion: the critique guards against
oversimplification, while Reformed theology highlights Scripture’s unity and
atonement’s depth. A balanced theology may integrate PSA with other
motifs—redemption, victory, reconciliation—reflecting the multifaceted beauty of
Christ’s cross. Further reflection is needed to honor the complexity of Old
Testament sacrifices and the mystery of atonement, ensuring a faithful witness
to God’s saving work.

This paper provides a deep, balanced exploration, expanding on the Passover and
weighing both sides fairly, as requested. Let me know if you’d like further
elaboration!
