# Detailed Analysis of Fixing What's Broken—God's Plan to Restore His Family

## Key Points

-   Research suggests the paper "Fixing What's Broken—God's Plan to Restore His
    Family" effectively presents atonement as relational restoration, focusing
    on mending relationships broken by sin.

-   It seems likely that the paper aligns with Christus Victor, Ransom,
    Recapitulation, and Moral Influence theories, contrasting with Penal
    Substitution.

-   The evidence leans toward the paper's use of the Divine Council World View,
    based on Michael Heiser's works, adding a cosmic dimension to atonement.

-   There is controversy around interpretations like the "sons of God" in
    Genesis 6, but the paper's scriptural basis is robust for academic
    theologians.

## Summary of the Paper

The paper explores God's plan to restore His family, disrupted by sin and
rebellion, emphasizing atonement as relational restoration rather than just
penal substitution. It traces this theme from Genesis to Revelation,
incorporating the Divine Council World View and aligning with various atonement
theories.

### Scriptural and Theoretical Support

The paper uses scriptures like Genesis 3 for the initial break, Genesis 6 for
rebel sons of God, and Colossians 2:15 for Christ's victory, supporting its
relational focus. It aligns with:

-   **Christus Victor**: Christ's defeat of evil forces.

-   **Ransom Theory**: Freeing humanity from sin's power.

-   **Recapitulation Theory**: Christ restoring humanity's original state.

-   **Moral Influence Theory**: Christ's example inspiring reconciliation.

The Divine Council World View, from Heiser's works, frames cosmic rebellion,
supported by Psalm 82 and Deuteronomy 32:8-9.

### Practical Implications

It encourages believers to live out restoration by healing relationships, caring
for creation, and joining the cosmic fight, with future hope in Revelation
21-22.

## Audience and Accessibility

Written for academic Biblical scholars and theologians, the paper avoids
assuming Hebrew or Greek fluency, using English translations and clear language,
making it accessible yet rigorous.

## Survey Note: Detailed Analysis of "Fixing What's Broken—God's Plan to Restore His Family"

The paper "Fixing What's Broken—God's Plan to Restore His Family" presents a
compelling case for understanding atonement as relational restoration,
contrasting with the narrower Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) model. This
analysis, aimed at academic Biblical scholars and theologians, evaluates the
paper's scriptural evidence, alignment with various atonement theories, and
incorporation of the Divine Council World View, while addressing
counterarguments and providing deeper scriptural references. The paper's
structure, from the initial disruption to the ultimate restoration, is examined
for its theological and exegetical robustness.

### Overview and Thesis

The paper's thesis is that God's plan is to restore His family, broken by sin
and rebellion, through a relational model of atonement. This is evident from the
table of contents, which progresses from the origin of the problem (Sections
1-2) to God's response (Section 3), theological insights (Section 4), practical
application (Section 5), future hope (Section 6), and scriptural validation
(Section 7). The introduction sets the stage by comparing God's family to a
human family, disrupted by rebellion, and introduces key concepts like PSA and
the Divine Council World View (DCW), emphasizing faith as loyalty.

### Scriptural Evidence and Analysis

The paper's scriptural foundation is robust, tracing the relational breakdown
from Genesis 3, where Adam and Eve's disobedience disrupts their relationship
with God, to the spread of rebellion involving the "sons of God" in Genesis
6:1-4 and the Tower of Babel in Genesis 11. Section 2, "Everything Falls Apart,"
details this expansion, with the rebel sons of God interpreted as fallen angels
mating with human women, producing the Nephilim, and the divine council going
rogue, as seen in Psalm 82. This interpretation, while supported by scholars
like Michael Heiser, is debated, with some seeing "sons of God" as human rulers.
The paper's reliance on Deuteronomy 32:8-9, where God assigns nations to the
sons of God, aligns with the Septuagint's reading, adding a cosmic dimension to
the problem.

God's response, detailed in Section 3, "God's Fix-It Plan," begins with Israel
and culminates in Christ, who fixes relationships between God and humanity
(e.g., Ephesians 2:11-18), among people (e.g., Luke 15's prodigal son), with
creation (Romans 8:19-22), and defeats rebellious spiritual beings (Colossians
2:15). Section 4, "Paul’s Big Picture," leverages Paul's writings, particularly
Romans, to show a corporate vision of restoration, uniting Jews and Gentiles
(Romans 11:25-26, Ephesians 2:14-16), contrasting with individualistic
interpretations. Section 5, "Living the Restoration Today," provides practical
applications, supported by commands like loving enemies (Matthew 5:44) and
caring for creation, aligning with Romans 8:19-22. Section 6, "The Big Finale,"
envisions the ultimate restoration in Revelation 21-22, where God dwells with
humanity, and Section 7, "Why Relational Restoration Makes Sense of the Bible,"
traces this theme comprehensively, though the full text is assumed to be
thorough.

### Alignment with Atonement Theories

The paper aligns with several atonement theories, offering a synthesis that
prioritizes relational restoration:

-   **Christus Victor**: Emphasized in Section 3.2.4, "Beating the Bad Guys,"
    with Christ's victory over evil forces (Colossians 2:15, Revelation
    12:7-12), fitting the liberation from sin, death, and the devil.

-   **Ransom Theory**: Seen in Christ's death freeing humanity from the power of
    sin and the devil, resonating with the paper's cosmic battle narrative.

-   **Recapitulation Theory**: Christ as the new Adam, restoring humanity's
    original state, is implicit in Section 3.2.1, "Fixing God and Us," with
    references to Revelation 22:14 and Romans 5:10.

-   **Moral Influence Theory**: Section 5's practical applications, inspired by
    Christ's example (e.g., Luke 23:34, John 13:1-17), align with this theory,
    emphasizing human response to God's love.

This contrasts with PSA, which the paper critiques for focusing on individual
debt payment, seen as too narrow compared to the relational and cosmic scope
presented.

### Incorporation of the Divine Council World View

The paper heavily incorporates the Divine Council World View, based on Michael
Heiser's works, framing the problem as not just human sin but cosmic rebellion.
Section 2.2, "The Rebel Sons of God," and 2.4, "The Divine Council Goes Rogue,"
reference Genesis 6:1-4, Psalm 82, and Deuteronomy 32:8-9, supported by Heiser's
"The Unseen Realm: Recovering the Supernatural Worldview of the Bible" ([The
Unseen Realm by Michael
Heiser](https://www.logos.com/product/49638/the-unseen-realm)). This view, while
not universally accepted, adds depth, showing Christ's work as reclaiming
nations from rebel spiritual beings, aligning with Christus Victor and Ransom
theories.

### Counterarguments and Rebuttals

Potential counterarguments include:

-   **From PSA Proponents:** The paper might downplay Christ's sacrificial death
    as payment for sin. However, it acknowledges this aspect (e.g., Section
    3.2.1, "takes on all the pain and mess"), framing it within relational
    restoration, supported by 2 Corinthians 5:18-21 and Romans 5:10, suggesting
    PSA is part but not the whole.

-   **On DCW:** Some may see it as marginal, but it has scriptural basis (Job
    1-2, 1 Kings 22:19-23) and scholarly support, and the paper's main points
    hold without it, focusing on relational themes.

### Deeper Scriptural References

To bolster the paper, additional references include:

-   **Old Testament:** Hosea 2:14-23 for God's wooing back Israel, Jeremiah
    31:31-34 for the new covenant, and Psalm 82 for divine council judgment.

-   **New Testament:** John 10:10 for Christ's abundant life, Acts 3:21 for
    restoring all things, and Ephesians 3:1-13 for the church's cosmic role.

### Unexpected Detail: Creation's Role

An unexpected detail is the paper's emphasis on creation's restoration (Section
5.3, 6.2), supported by Romans 8:19-22, showing creation as part of God's
family, not just a backdrop, aligning with the relational model.

### Accessibility for Audience

Written for academic scholars without assuming Hebrew or Greek fluency, the
paper uses English translations and clear language, making it accessible yet
rigorous, with references to standard exegetical practices.

### Conclusion

The paper successfully presents a relational view of atonement, supported by
scriptural evidence and aligned with Christus Victor, Ransom, Recapitulation,
and Moral Influence theories. It challenges PSA's narrow focus, incorporating
the DCW for a cosmic perspective, with practical and eschatological
implications. Further study, such as Heiser's works or N.T. Wright's "Paul and
the Faithfulness of God" ([Paul and the Faithfulness of God by N.T.
Wright](https://www.fortresspress.com/store/product/9780800626839/Paul-and-the-Faithfulness-of-God)),
can deepen understanding.

### Key Citations

-   [The Unseen Realm by Michael
    Heiser](https://www.logos.com/product/49638/the-unseen-realm)

-   [Paul and the Faithfulness of God by N.T.
    Wright](https://www.fortresspress.com/store/product/9780800626839/Paul-and-the-Faithfulness-of-God)

# Appendix: Deepsearch thinking details

Thoughts

So, the user has provided a detailed outline of a paper called "Fixing What's
Broken—God's Plan to Restore His Family." The task is to provide a detailed
analysis of this paper, focusing on supporting evidence, counterarguments, and
deeper scriptural references. The analysis should align with specific theories
of atonement like Christus Victor, Ransom Theory, Recapitulation theory, and the
Moral Influence theory, while also considering the Divine Council or
Supernatural World View based on Michael Heiser's works. The audience is
academic Biblical scholars and theologians, so the language and depth should be
appropriate for that level, but without assuming knowledge of Hebrew or Greek.

First, I need to understand the paper's main thesis. From the table of contents,
it seems that the paper is about God's plan to restore His family, which was
broken due to sin and rebellion. The restoration involves mending relationships
between God and humanity, among humans, between humans and creation, and dealing
with rebellious spiritual beings.

The paper is structured into several sections:

1.  How It All Started: God's original plan and the initial disruption.

2.  Everything Falls Apart: The spread of rebellion and its consequences.

3.  God's Fix-It Plan: God's response through Israel and ultimately through
    Christ.

4.  Paul’s Big Picture: How Paul's writings support this restoration narrative.

5.  Living the Restoration Today: Practical implications for believers.

6.  The Big Finale—God’s Family Restored: The ultimate goal and future hope.

7.  Why Relational Restoration Makes Sense of the Bible: Scriptural validation
    of the thesis.

My task is to analyze this paper, providing supporting evidence,
counterarguments, and deeper scriptural references, particularly focusing on how
it relates to various atonement theories and the Divine Council World View.

Let's start by understanding the different atonement theories mentioned:

-   **Christus Victor**: This theory sees atonement as Christ's victory over the
    forces of evil, particularly the devil. It's about liberation from the
    powers of sin, death, and the devil.

-   **Ransom Theory**: Similar to Christus Victor, it views Christ's death as a
    ransom paid to free humanity from slavery to sin and the devil.

-   **Recapitulation Theory**: This theory, associated with Irenaeus, sees
    Christ as summing up or recapitulating the entire human experience,
    correcting where Adam failed, and thus restoring humanity to its original
    state.

-   **Moral Influence Theory**: This theory, associated with Abelard, emphasizes
    that Christ's death was a demonstration of God's love, which influences
    humans to respond in kind, leading to reconciliation.

-   **Penal Substitution Theory**: This is the theory the paper seems to be
    contrasting with, where Christ's death is seen as a substitutionary
    punishment for human sin, satisfying God's justice.

The paper seems to be promoting a relational view of atonement, focusing on
restoration of relationships rather than just penal substitution.

Now, the Divine Council World View, based on Michael Heiser's works, refers to
the idea that God has a council of spiritual beings (Elohim) who assist in
governing the universe. Some of these beings rebelled, leading to the problems
described in the paper.

To analyze the paper, I need to:

1.  Identify how the paper supports its thesis with scriptural evidence.

2.  See how this relational restoration model aligns with or differs from the
    mentioned atonement theories.

3.  Provide counterarguments or possible rebuttals and address them.

4.  Offer deeper scriptural references to support the paper's points.

5.  Note how this model relates to the Divine Council World View.

Given that, I should start by looking at each section of the paper and seeing
how it connects to these points.

Let's begin with Section 1: How It All Started.

From the introduction, it's clear that the paper starts with God's original plan
for a harmonious family with humanity, disrupted by human disobedience in Eden,
and further complicated by the rebellion of some spiritual beings.

To support this, the paper likely references Genesis 1-3 for the creation and
fall, and perhaps Genesis 6:1-4 for the rebel sons of God.

In terms of atonement theories, the initial disruption in Eden sets the stage
for the need for redemption. The Christus Victor and Ransom theories would see
this as the point where humanity is enslaved to sin and the devil, needing
liberation.

The recapitulation theory would see Christ as the new Adam, undoing the effects
of the first Adam's sin.

The moral influence theory might focus on how God's response to sin demonstrates
His character, influencing humanity to return to Him.

So, the paper's narrative aligns with these theories in that it's about
restoring what was lost due to sin and rebellion, not just paying a legal debt.

Now, Section 2: Everything Falls Apart.

This section seems to detail how the rebellion spread, with the rebel sons of
God (likely the Nephilim story in Genesis 6), the Tower of Babel, and the divine
council going rogue (as per Psalm 82).

This ties into the Divine Council World View, where some spiritual beings rebel
and are punished or assigned to manage nations, leading to further chaos.

In this context, atonement isn't just about individual sin but about cosmic
rebellion and the need to restore order in the entire universe.

This aligns with Christus Victor, where Christ's victory is over all powers of
evil, not just personal sin.

Section 3: God’s Fix-It Plan.

This section likely discusses how God starts His restoration plan with Israel
and then through Christ.

Christ is presented as fixing the relationships:

-   Between God and humanity.

-   Among people.

-   Between humans and creation.

-   By defeating the bad guys (rebellious spiritual beings).

This comprehensive view of restoration fits well with the Christus Victor and
Recapitulation theories, where Christ's work is to restore all things to their
original state, defeating the forces that caused the disruption.

Section 4: Paul’s Big Picture.

This section probably looks at how Paul's writings, especially in Romans,
support this relational restoration model.

Paul is known for his emphasis on justification and righteousness, but the paper
might highlight how Paul's vision is about bringing Jews and Gentiles together,
and the whole creation being restored.

This aligns with the idea that atonement is about more than individual
salvation; it's about the redemption of all creation.

Section 5: Living the Restoration Today.

This section would discuss practical implications for believers, such as how to
relate to God, heal human relationships, care for creation, and join the cosmic
fight.

This shows that the restoration is not just a future event but something that
believers are to participate in now.

Section 6: The Big Finale—God’s Family Restored.

This section likely describes the ultimate restoration, where God's family is
fully reconciled, and the world is made right.

This ties into the eschatological hope in Christianity, where all things are
renewed.

Section 7: Why Relational Restoration Makes Sense of the Bible.

This section provides scriptural validation for the thesis, likely tracing the
theme from Genesis to Revelation.

Now, to provide a detailed analysis, I need to:

-   Confirm the scriptural references used in the paper and see if they
    accurately support the points.

-   Look for any potential misinterpretations or areas where the paper might be
    stretching the text.

-   Provide additional scriptural references that further support the paper's
    arguments.

-   Address possible counterarguments, especially from those who hold to the
    Penal Substitution theory.

-   Show how this relational restoration model aligns with or differs from the
    mentioned atonement theories.

-   Highlight how the Divine Council World View influences the paper's
    perspective.

Given that, I might need to use the web search tool to look up specific
scriptures, understand different interpretations, and find academic resources
that discuss these topics.

Let me think about some key points where I might need to dig deeper.

First, the concept of the Divine Council and rebel sons of God.

Michael Heiser's works are crucial here. I should look up his books or articles
to understand his perspective on this.

From what I recall, Heiser argues that the "sons of God" in Genesis 6 are fallen
angels who mated with human women, producing the Nephilim, and that this event
is part of a larger rebellion against God's order.

This connects to Deuteronomy 32:8-9, where God assigns the nations to the sons
of God, and Israel is His portion.

This sets up the idea that the nations are under the influence of these rebel
beings, and God's plan is to reclaim them through Israel and ultimately through
Christ.

So, in the paper, this would be used to show that the problem is not just human
sin but also supernatural rebellion, and thus, atonement must address both.

Now, how does this relate to atonement theories?

In Christus Victor and Ransom theories, Christ's death and resurrection are seen
as defeating the powers of evil, which aligns with this view.

In contrast, Penal Substitution focuses more on Christ satisfying God's justice
for human sin, which might not directly address the supernatural aspect.

So, the paper is likely critiquing Penal Substitution for being too narrow and
not considering the full scope of the problem.

However, some might argue that Penal Substitution can be compatible with these
other views, as Christ's death satisfies justice and also defeats the devil.

So, I need to see how the paper addresses that.

Another point is the role of Israel.

The paper seems to see Israel as the starting point of God's restoration plan,
which is a common view in Christian theology.

But I need to see if it's handled correctly, especially in light of Paul's
writings.

In Romans, Paul discusses how through Israel's failure, the Gentiles are
included, and eventually, all Israel will be saved.

So, the paper likely uses this to show that God's plan is to bring all nations
back to Him through Christ, with Israel playing a key role.

Now, to provide deeper scriptural references, I can look for passages that
emphasize relational restoration.

For example, Hosea's marriage metaphor, where God's relationship with Israel is
like a husband with an unfaithful wife, and God's love and restoration are
emphasized.

Or, the prodigal son parable, which the paper mentions, showing God's welcoming
back of repentant humanity.

Also, Ephesians 2:11-22, where Christ reconciles Jews and Gentiles into one new
humanity.

For counterarguments, someone might say that the primary meaning of atonement is
penal substitution, and that the other aspects are secondary.

To counter that, I can point to historical developments of atonement theories
and how the early church fathers emphasized Christus Victor and Ransom theories
more than Penal Substitution.

Also, scripturally, while there are passages that can be interpreted as Penal
Substitution (like 2 Cor 5:21), there are many more that emphasize victory over
evil, reconciliation, and restoration.

Another counterargument could be that the Divine Council World View is not
widely accepted in mainstream theology, so the paper's reliance on it might be
seen as fringe.

To address that, I can note that while it's not universally accepted, it has a
basis in scripture and is supported by some scholars, and that even if one
doesn't fully accept it, the relational restoration model can still stand on its
own.

Alternatively, I can show how the paper's points hold even without fully
endorsing the Divine Council World View.

Wait, but the paper seems to incorporate the Divine Council World View heavily,
so I need to see if that's essential to its argument or if it's peripheral.

From the table of contents, Section 2.2 mentions "The Rebel Sons of God," and
Section 2.4 mentions "The Divine Council Goes Rogue," so it's a central part of
the narrative.

Therefore, I need to engage with that.

So, to support the paper, I can look for scriptural evidence for the Divine
Council and its rebellion, and how that connects to the need for restoration.

Key passages would be:

-   Genesis 6:1-4

-   Psalm 82

-   Deuteronomy 32:8-9 (in some translations, it mentions "sons of God" or
    "angels")

-   Daniel 10, where there are princes of nations that are spiritual beings

-   Ephesians 6:12, mentioning rulers and authorities in heavenly places

Michael Heiser's book "The Unseen Realm" is a major resource for this view.

So, I can reference that or look for academic articles that discuss this
perspective.

Now, to align this with the atonement theories:

-   Christus Victor: Christ defeats the rebel spiritual beings.

-   Ransom Theory: Christ pays a ransom to free humanity from their power.

-   Recapitulation Theory: Christ recapitulates the entire human experience,
    including dealing with the supernatural rebellion.

-   Moral Influence Theory: While this theory focuses more on human response, it
    can still fit if we see Christ's life and death as demonstrating God's
    character in the face of evil.

So, the paper's model seems to align well with Christus Victor and Ransom
theories, and to some extent with Recapitulation.

Now, to make sure I'm thorough, I should look at specific parts of the paper's
sections and see if there's any point that needs clarification or additional
support.

Let's take Section 3.2: Fixing God and Us.

The paper says that through Christ's life, death, and resurrection, He brings us
back to God, tearing down the wall built by sin.

This is standard Christian doctrine, and scripturally supported by passages like
Ephesians 2:11-18, Colossians 1:21-22, and 2 Cor 5:18-21.

But to connect it to the relational restoration model, I can emphasize that it's
not just about legal justification but about restoring the relationship.

So, for example, in Romans 5:10, "we were reconciled to God through the death of
his Son," which is relational language.

Similarly, in John 17:20-26, Christ prays for unity among His followers and with
God, emphasizing relationship.

Section 3.2.4: Beating the Bad Guys.

This likely refers to Christ's victory over the rebel spiritual beings.

Scriptural support would be Colossians 2:15, where Christ disarms the rulers and
authorities, making a public spectacle of them.

Also, Revelation 12:7-12, where Michael and his angels defeat the dragon and his
angels.

So, that's clear.

Now, Section 4: Paul’s Big Picture.

The paper mentions that Paul's mission is to bring the family back together,
with a focus on Jews and Gentiles.

This is well-supported in Romans 11, where Paul discusses the relationship
between Israel and the Church.

But I need to make sure that the paper doesn't misrepresent Paul's views or
overlook important aspects.

For instance, some might argue that Paul's primary concern is individual
justification, not corporate restoration.

To counter that, I can point to passages where Paul clearly has a corporate
vision, like Gal 3:28, where there's neither Jew nor Greek, but all are one in
Christ.

Also, Ephesians 1:9-10, where God's plan is to bring all things in heaven and on
earth under one head, Christ.

So, Paul does have a big picture of cosmic restoration.

Section 5: Living the Restoration Today.

This section is about practical application, so it's less about scriptural
exegesis and more about how to live out the theology.

But I can look for scriptural commands or examples that support the points made,
such as loving enemies, caring for creation, etc.

Section 6: The Big Finale.

This would reference Revelation 21-22, the new heaven and new earth, where God
dwells with humanity, and all things are made new.

So, that's straightforward.

Now, Section 7: Why Relational Restoration Makes Sense of the Bible.

This is where the paper likely provides a comprehensive scriptural case for its
thesis.

To analyze this, I need to see if the paper accurately traces the theme from
Genesis to Revelation.

I can look for key passages that might be missed or misinterpreted.

For example, does the paper address the atonement in Levitical terms, and how
that connects to relational restoration?

In the Old Testament, sacrifices were for atonement, but in what sense?

Some see them as covering sin, while others see them as restoring relationship.

So, I need to see how the paper handles that.

Also, does the paper discuss the concept of shalom, which is often translated as
peace but means comprehensive well-being and harmony, which aligns with
relational restoration.

Additionally, the paper might not delve deeply into the Trinity, but since God
is relational in Himself (Father, Son, Spirit), that could be another layer of
support for the relational view.

Now, to provide a detailed analysis, I should structure it as follows:

1.  Introduction: Summarize the paper's thesis and its importance.

2.  Support for the Thesis:

a. Scriptural evidence from each section.

b. How it aligns with Christus Victor, Ransom, Recapitulation, and Moral
Influence theories.

c. How it relates to the Divine Council World View.

1.  Counterarguments and Rebuttals:

a. Potential criticisms from those who hold to Penal Substitution.

b. Addressing misinterpretations or overstatements in the paper.

1.  Deeper Scriptural References:

a. Additional passages that bolster the paper's points.

b. Connections to other theological themes that support relational restoration.

1.  Conclusion: Summarize how the paper successfully presents its case and the
    implications for understanding atonement.

Given that, I need to make sure that my analysis is balanced, acknowledging both
the strengths and any potential weaknesses of the paper's arguments.

Also, since the audience is academic Biblical scholars and theologians, I need
to use appropriate language and references, but without assuming they know
Hebrew or Greek.

So, I should stick to English translations and standard exegetical practices.

Now, to use the tools effectively, I can:

-   Use web search to look up specific scriptures or concepts.

-   Use browse page to access academic articles or books that discuss these
    topics.

-   Use X search if there's a need to see current discussions or debates on
    social media, but that might not be as relevant for an academic analysis.

However, since the paper is provided, and I need to analyze it, I might not need
to search externally as much as if I were trying to find information from
scratch.

But to make sure I have the best understanding, I can look up certain points or
confirm interpretations.

For example, I can search for "Michael Heiser Divine Council" to refresh my
memory on his views.

Or, look up "atonement theories comparison" to see how they relate to each
other.

Also, I can look for academic critiques of the Penal Substitution theory to see
common arguments against it.

Wait a minute, the user's question is to provide a detailed analysis of the
paper, not to write the paper itself.

But the paper's content is provided in the form of the table of contents and the
introduction section.

Wait, looking back, the user provided the table of contents and the introduction
section, and then the full introduction text.

But the rest of the sections are not provided; only their titles and brief
descriptions are given.

So, I need to assume the content based on those descriptions and analyze it
accordingly.

Wait, no, the user said, "Here is the paper: Below is an updated Table of
Contents (TOC) for the paper Fixing What's Broken—God's Plan to Restore His
Family."

Then, the TOC is provided, followed by "Below is the Introduction section for
your thesis, titled "Fixing What's Broken—God's Plan to Restore His Family.""

So, the introduction section is provided, and the rest are just the TOC.

Wait, but then it says, "This is the full Introduction section, written as you
requested—not a Table of Contents, but the actual content."

So, the introduction is the actual content, and the rest are just the TOC.

But then, the user says, "Let me know if you’d like me to adjust anything or
move on to another section!"

Wait, it's a bit confusing.

Looking back, the user is the one who is writing the paper, and I am supposed to
analyze it.

But the user provided the TOC and the introduction, and then said, "This is the
full Introduction section, written as you requested—not a Table of Contents, but
the actual content."

Wait, no, the user is me, and the assistant is the AI.

Wait, in this context, the user is the one who posted the question, and I am the
AI assistant.

So, the user provided the paper's TOC and the introduction section, and now I
need to analyze the paper based on that.

But the paper's full content isn't provided; only the TOC and the introduction
are.

So, I need to assume what the paper says based on the TOC and the introduction,
and then provide an analysis.

Wait, but the user also provided Section 2, Section 3, Section 4, and Section 5,
as per the conversation history.

Wait, let's clarify the conversation flow.

The user provided:

-   Updated Table of Contents (TOC)

-   Introduction section

-   Then, in response to "Let me know if you’d like to keep going or tweak
    anything here," the assistant said, "Alright, let’s move on to the next part
    of the story! Below is Section 2: Everything Falls Apart, which builds on
    the foundation we laid in Section 1: How It All Started."

So, it seems that the assistant is writing the paper section by section, and the
user is reviewing it.

But in the context of my task, I am to analyze the paper as a whole, based on
the provided sections.

Wait, but the user's question is:

"i now need a detailed analysis of this paper that provides supporting evidence,
counter argues possible rebuttal's, and dives deeper into more supporting
scriptural references."

And the paper is "Fixing What's Broken—God's Plan to Restore His Family."

So, the paper consists of the TOC and the sections provided in the conversation.

Looking at the conversation, the following sections are provided:

-   Introduction

-   Section 2: Everything Falls Apart

-   Section 3: God’s Fix-It Plan

-   Section 4: Paul’s Big Picture

-   Section 5: Living the Restoration Today

-   Section 6: The Big Finale—God’s Family Restored

-   Section 7: Why Relational Restoration Makes Sense of the Bible

So, I have the full text of these sections, and I need to analyze them.

Wait, no, looking back, the user provided the TOC, then the introduction, and
then the assistant provided Section 2, Section 3, etc., as if writing the paper.

So, in the conversation, the assistant is generating the paper section by
section, and the user is presumably reviewing it.

But in the context of my task, I need to treat the entire conversation as the
paper's content and analyze it.

So, I need to consider all the sections provided by the assistant as the paper's
content.

Therefore, I have the paper's content from Introduction to Section 7.

So, my task is to analyze that content, providing supporting evidence,
counterarguments, and deeper scriptural references, focusing on the mentioned
atonement theories and the Divine Council World View.

Alright, with that clarified, I can proceed to analyze the paper section by
section.

First, I'll summarize the paper's main points and how they support the
relational restoration model of atonement.

Then, I'll look for scriptural accuracy and provide additional references where
needed.

Next, I'll address possible counterarguments, especially from the perspective of
Penal Substitution theory.

Finally, I'll connect the paper's arguments to the various atonement theories
and the Divine Council World View.

Let's start with the Introduction.

The introduction sets the stage by comparing God's family to a human family,
with rebellion causing relational breakdowns.

It introduces Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) and the Divine Council World
View (DCW), and explains that faith is about loyalty to God.

It's written in a simple, engaging way, which is good for a general audience,
but since the analysis is for academic scholars, I might need to use more formal
language in my analysis.

Now, Section 2: Everything Falls Apart.

This section details the spread of rebellion from Eden to the Tower of Babel,
involving rebel sons of God and the divine council going rogue.

It's important to verify the scriptural basis for these claims.

For instance, the rebel sons of God in Genesis 6:1-4 are interpreted as fallen
angels, which is a common interpretation but not universally accepted.

Some scholars see them as human rulers or something else.

So, I need to acknowledge that there's debate around this interpretation.

Similarly, Psalm 82 is used to show God judging the divine council, which again,
depends on how one interprets "Elohim" in that context.

So, in my analysis, I should note that the paper relies on a specific
interpretation of these passages, which is supported by some scholars like
Heiser, but not all.

Section 3: God’s Fix-It Plan.

This section discusses God's response through Israel and then through Christ,
who fixes relationships in various ways.

It's important to see how Christ's work is described in terms of relational
restoration.

For example, in 3.2.1, "Fixing God and Us," it mentions that through Christ, the
wall between God and humanity is torn down, which is biblically accurate.

In 3.2.4, "Beating the Bad Guys," it references Colossians 2:15, which is a key
passage for Christus Victor.

So, this section aligns well with the Christus Victor and Ransom theories.

Section 4: Paul’s Big Picture.

This section explores Paul's writings, particularly Romans, to show that his
vision is about reuniting God's family, not just individual salvation.

It's crucial to see if the paper accurately represents Paul's theology.

For instance, it says that Paul’s mission is to bring the family back together,
which is true, as seen in his emphasis on Jew and Greek being one in Christ.

However, some might argue that Paul's primary focus is on individual
justification.

So, I need to provide scriptural support that Paul does have a corporate and
cosmic view of redemption.

Section 5: Living the Restoration Today.

This section provides practical applications, which are generally in line with
Christian ethics.

No major scriptural issues here, as it's more about application than exegesis.

Section 6: The Big Finale—God’s Family Restored.

This section describes the ultimate restoration, referencing Revelation 21-22.

Again, this is standard Christian eschatology.

Section 7: Why Relational Restoration Makes Sense of the Bible.

This section is supposed to provide a scriptural foundation for the thesis.

From the provided text, it seems to trace the theme from Genesis to Revelation,
which is good.

However, since the full text of this section isn't provided, I need to assume
that it does so effectively.

Now, for the analysis, I'll need to:

-   Confirm the accuracy of the paper's scriptural interpretations.

-   Provide additional scriptural references that support the paper's points.

-   Address potential counterarguments, particularly from those who hold to
    Penal Substitution.

-   Show how the paper's model aligns with Christus Victor, Ransom,
    Recapitulation, and Moral Influence theories.

-   Note any connections to the Divine Council World View.

Let me start by confirming the scriptural interpretations.

In Section 2.2, "The Rebel Sons of God," the paper refers to Genesis 6:1- 4 as
some Elohim coming to Earth and having children with human women.

This is a common interpretation, but some scholars argue that "sons of God"
refers to human rulers or descendants of Seth.

To support the paper, I can cite Heiser's work or other scholars who hold this
view.

Similarly, in Section 2.4, "The Divine Council Goes Rogue," it references Psalm
82, where God judges the Elohim for their failures.

Again, the interpretation of "Elohim" as spiritual beings is debated, with some
seeing them as human judges.

So, I need to acknowledge that there's a range of interpretations but that the
paper's view has scriptural support.

Moving to Section 3.2, "Fixing God and Us," the paper mentions that Christ's
death and resurrection bring humanity back to God, which is widely accepted.

However, to connect it to relational restoration, I can cite passages like Hosea
2:14-23, where God woos Israel back, or Jeremiah 31:31-34, the new covenant
promising a relational renewal.

For Section 4, to support that Paul has a big picture, I can reference Ephesians
1:9-10, where God's plan is to unite all things in Christ, or Colossians
1:19-20, where through Christ, God reconciles all things to Himself.

Now, for counterarguments from Penal Substitution advocates, they might say that
the paper downplays the importance of Christ's sacrificial death as payment for
sin.

To address this, I can note that the paper does mention that Christ takes on the
pain and mess we caused, dying on the cross, which can be seen as a form of
substitution.

However, the paper frames it more as a means to restore relationships rather
than satisfy justice.

So, I can argue that while Penal Substitution is one way to understand Christ's
death, the relational view encompasses that and more.

Another counterargument could be that the Divine Council World View is not
necessary for the relational restoration model.

To that, I can say that while the model can stand without it, incorporating it
provides a deeper understanding of the cosmic scope of the problem and solution.

Now, to connect to the mentioned atonement theories:

-   Christus Victor: The paper's emphasis on Christ beating the bad guys aligns
    with this theory.

-   Ransom Theory: The idea that Christ frees humanity from the power of sin and
    the devil fits with this theory.

-   Recapitulation Theory: Christ as the new Adam, fixing what was broken, is
    present in the paper's narrative.

-   Moral Influence Theory: The paper's focus on living the restoration today,
    inspired by Christ's example, resonates with this theory.

So, the paper's model is compatible with these theories and can be seen as a
synthesis of them, prioritizing relational restoration over legal satisfaction.

In conclusion, the paper effectively presents a relational view of atonement,
supported by scriptural evidence and aligned with several traditional atonement
theories.

It challenges the narrow focus of Penal Substitution by offering a more
comprehensive understanding of God's plan to restore His family.

To further support the paper, I can provide a list of scriptural references that
underpin its arguments, and suggest additional reading for those interested in
the Divine Council World View.

Also, I can note that while there are differing interpretations of certain
passages, the paper's perspective is valid and enriching for understanding the
Biblical narrative.

So, that's my initial analysis.

To make it more detailed, I can go through each section and provide specific
scriptural references or academic sources that support or challenge the paper's
points.

For example, in Section 2.2, I can cite Heiser's "The Unseen Realm" or his
article on the Nephilim.

In Section 3.2.1, I can reference Romans 5:10, 2 Cor 5:18-21, and Ephesians
2:11-18 for the reconciliation aspect.

For Section 4, I can look up scholarly articles on Paul's ecclesiology and his
view of the church as the new Israel or the body of Christ.

And so on.

I think that's a good plan.

Now, to make sure I'm not missing anything, I should double-check if the paper
adequately addresses the role of faith as loyalty, which it mentions in the
introduction.

In the paper, faith is described as sticking with God, being loyal to Him, which
aligns with the relational view.

This is consistent with the idea that faith is not just intellectual assent but
a relational commitment.

So, that's well-handled.

Another point is the paper's critique of individualistic interpretations of
salvation.

In Section 4.3, it challenges "it's all about me" ideas, which is important for
emphasizing the corporate nature of God's plan.

To support that, I can reference the concept of the "people of God" throughout
scripture, from Israel to the church.

Also, the paper's emphasis on creation care in Section 5.3 connects to the
relational restoration, as creation is part of God's family.

This is a bit of a stretch, but scripturally, it's supported by Romans 8:19-22,
where creation waits for the revelation of the sons of God.

So, that's fine.

Now, to provide deeper scriptural references, I can suggest looking at the
following passages:

-   For the Divine Council: Job 1-2, where God and the satan interact; 1 Kings
    22:19-23, where God's council is mentioned.

-   For relational restoration in the Old Testament: Hosea, especially chapters
    1-3; Jeremiah 3:1-18.

-   For Christ's role in restoration: John 10:10, where He came to give life
    abundantly; Acts 3:21, where He restores all things.

-   For Paul's big picture: Ephesians 3:1-13, where he discusses the mystery of
    Christ uniting Jews and Gentiles, and the church's role in the heavenly
    places.

So, my analysis would include these points, structured appropriately for an
academic audience.

I think that's comprehensive.

Now, to make sure I've covered all the bases, I'll outline the analysis as
follows:

1.  **Introduction**

    -   The paper presents a relational view of atonement, focusing on God's
        plan to restore His family.

    -   It contrasts this with Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA), which it
        sees as too narrow.

    -   The paper incorporates the Divine Council World View, which adds a
        cosmic dimension to the problem and solution.

2.  **Support for the Thesis**

    -   **Scriptural Evidence:**

        -   Genesis 1-3 for the initial relational break.

        -   Genesis 6:1-4 and Psalm 82 for the rebel sons of God and the divine
            council's role.

        -   God's response through Israel and Christ, with Christ fixing various
            relationships.

        -   Paul's writings in Romans and Ephesians for the big picture of
            restoration.

    -   **Alignment with Atonement Theories:**

        -   Christus Victor: Christ's victory over evil forces.

        -   Ransom Theory: Christ freeing humanity from sin and the devil.

        -   Recapitulation Theory: Christ recapitulating human experience to
            restore it.

        -   Moral Influence Theory: Christ's life and death influencing human
            behavior.

    -   **Divine Council World View:**

        -   Provides a framework for understanding the cosmic rebellion and
            God's plan to reclaim the nations.

3.  **Counterarguments and Rebuttals**

    -   **From Penal Substitution Proponents:**

        -   The paper might be seen as downplaying the importance of Christ's
            sacrificial death as payment for sin.

        -   Rebuttal: The paper does acknowledge Christ's death as taking on the
            mess, but frames it within a broader relational context.

    -   **On the Divine Council World View:**

        -   Some might see this view as marginal or not widely accepted.

        -   Rebuttal: While not universally accepted, it has scriptural basis
            and support from some scholars, and the paper's main points can
            stand even if one doesn't fully endorse this view.

4.  **Deeper Scriptural References**

    -   **Old Testament:**

        -   Hosea 2:14-23, Jeremiah 31:31-34 for relational restoration.

        -   Psalm 82, Deuteronomy 32:8-9 for the divine council.

    -   **New Testament:**

        -   Colossians 2:15, Revelation 12:7-12 for Christ's victory over
            supernatural forces.

        -   Ephesians 1:9-10, Colossians 1:19-20 for the cosmic scope of
            restoration.

        -   Romans 8:19-22 for creation's participation in restoration.

5.  **Conclusion**

    -   The paper successfully presents a relational view of atonement,
        supported by a range of scriptural evidence and aligned with several
        traditional atonement theories.

    -   It challenges the narrow focus of PSA and provides a comprehensive
        understanding of God's plan to restore His family.

    -   Further study on the Divine Council World View and its implications for
        atonement can deepen one's appreciation of the paper's arguments.

That should be a solid analysis.

Now, to make it even better, I can look for specific academic sources that
discuss these topics.

For example, for the Divine Council, I can cite Michael Heiser's "The Unseen
Realm: Recovering the Supernatural Worldview of the Bible."

For atonement theories, I can reference works like Gustav Aulén's "Christus
Victor" for the Christus Victor theory, or J. Denney's "The Death of Christ" for
Penal Substitution.

For Paul's theology, I can look up books like N.T. Wright's "Paul and the
Faithfulness of God."

So, incorporating these references will make the analysis more robust.

Also, I can note any potential areas where the paper might be unclear or need
further clarification.

For instance, in Section 2.3, "The Tower of Babel: Round Three," the paper
mentions that God handed over the nations to the Elohim to manage.

This is based on Deuteronomy 32:8-9, but in some translations, it's "sons of
Israel" instead of "sons of God."

So, I need to clarify that the paper likely uses the Septuagint or other
translations that have "sons of God."

Similarly, in Section 3.2.3, "Making Nature Nice Again," it mentions that
creation will be healed, which is scripturally supported, but I can specify that
this is part of the new creation, not necessarily the current one.

But overall, the paper seems well-researched and scripturally sound.

So, I think that's sufficient for the analysis.

**Final Answer**

To provide a detailed analysis of the paper "Fixing What's Broken—God's Plan to
Restore His Family," which presents a relational view of atonement, we must
examine its scriptural basis, alignment with various atonement theories, and its
incorporation of the Divine Council World View. The paper's thesis is that God's
plan is to restore His family, mending relationships broken by sin and
rebellion, and that this understanding of atonement is more comprehensive than
the Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) model.

**Support for the Thesis**

1.  **Scriptural Evidence:**

    -   The paper traces the relational breakdown from Genesis 3, where Adam and
        Eve's disobedience disrupts their relationship with God, to the spread
        of rebellion through the "sons of God" in Genesis 6 and the Tower of
        Babel in Genesis 11.

    -   It highlights God's response through the covenant with Abraham and the
        role of Israel, leading to the ultimate fix through Christ, who
        reconciles God and humanity, humans with each other, and humans with
        creation, while also defeating rebellious spiritual beings.

    -   Paul's letters, particularly Romans, are used to show that his vision is
        about bringing the whole family back together, not just individual
        salvation.

2.  **Alignment with Atonement Theories:**

    -   **Christus Victor:** The paper emphasizes Christ's victory over evil
        forces, aligning with this theory.

    -   **Ransom Theory:** It presents Christ as freeing humanity from the power
        of sin and the devil.

    -   **Recapitulation Theory:** Christ is seen as recapitulating human
        experience to restore what was lost.

    -   **Moral Influence Theory:** The practical application section encourages
        living out Christ's example of love and reconciliation.

3.  **Divine Council World View:**

    -   The paper incorporates the idea of a divine council of spiritual beings,
        some of whom rebelled, leading to the need for restoration. This view,
        supported by scholars like Michael Heiser, adds a cosmic dimension to
        the problem and solution.

**Counterarguments and Rebuttals**

1.  **From Penal Substitution Proponents:**

    -   **Counterargument:** The paper might be seen as diminishing the
        importance of Christ's sacrificial death as payment for sin.

    -   **Rebuttal:** While the paper frames Christ's death within a relational
        context, it still acknowledges His death as taking on the mess caused by
        sin. The relational view encompasses and extends beyond the legal
        satisfaction aspect of PSA.

2.  **On the Divine Council World View:**

    -   **Counterargument:** This view might be considered marginal or not
        widely accepted.

    -   **Rebuttal:** Although not universally accepted, the Divine Council
        World View has scriptural support and is espoused by some scholars. The
        paper's main points remain valid even if one does not fully endorse this
        view.

**Deeper Scriptural References**

-   **Old Testament:**

    -   Hosea 2:14-23 and Jeremiah 31:31-34 illustrate God's desire for
        relational restoration.

    -   Psalm 82 and Deuteronomy 32:8-9 provide evidence for the divine council
        and its role in managing nations.

-   **New Testament:**

    -   Colossians 2:15 and Revelation 12:7-12 depict Christ's victory over
        supernatural forces.

    -   Ephesians 1:9-10 and Colossians 1:19-20 highlight the cosmic scope of
        restoration.

    -   Romans 8:19-22 shows creation's participation in the restoration
        process.

**Conclusion**

The paper effectively presents a relational view of atonement, supported by a
wide range of scriptural evidence and aligned with several traditional atonement
theories. It challenges the narrow focus of PSA by offering a more comprehensive
understanding of God's plan to restore His family. Further study on the Divine
Council World View can deepen one's appreciation of the paper's arguments.

**Citations:**

-   Heiser, M. S. (2015). The Unseen Realm: Recovering the Supernatural
    Worldview of the Bible. Lexham Press.

-   Aulén, G. (1931). Christus Victor: An Historical Study of the Three Main
    Types of the Idea of the Atonement. Macmillan.

-   Denney, J. (1903). The Death of Christ. Hodder and Stoughton.

-   Wright, N. T. (2013). Paul and the Faithfulness of God. Fortress Press.

**Note:** The analysis assumes the paper's content based on the provided
sections and the table of contents. For a complete analysis, the full text of
the paper should be reviewed
