Contents

[A Critique of Reformed Theology’s Use of Old Testament Blood Sacrifices in
Penal Substitutionary
Atonement](#a-critique-of-reformed-theologys-use-of-old-testament-blood-sacrifices-in-penal-substitutionary-atonement)

[Introduction](#introduction)

[The Diversity of Old Testament
Sacrifices](#the-diversity-of-old-testament-sacrifices)

[Specific Examples: Passover and the Day of Atonement](#_Toc191461231)

[The Multifaceted Symbolism of Blood](#the-multifaceted-symbolism-of-blood)

[Theological Implications and Incoherence](#_Toc191461233)

[Counterarguments and Rebuttal](#_Toc191461234)

[Conclusion](#_Toc191461235)

## A Critique of Reformed Theology’s Use of Old Testament Blood Sacrifices in Penal Substitutionary Atonement

### 

### Introduction

Penal Substitutionary Atonement (PSA) is a foundational doctrine within Reformed
theology, asserting that Jesus Christ’s death served as a substitutionary
sacrifice to bear the punishment for humanity’s sins, thereby satisfying divine
justice and enabling reconciliation with God. This theological framework heavily
draws on the Old Testament sacrificial system, interpreting these ancient
rituals as prefigurations of Christ’s ultimate sacrifice. Proponents of PSA
contend that, just as animals were offered to atone for sins in the Old
Testament, Christ’s death fulfilled this pattern by taking humanity’s
punishment. However, this reliance on Old Testament blood sacrifices is fraught
with interpretive challenges. The sacrificial system is diverse and
multifaceted, serving purposes beyond mere sin atonement, embedded within the
specific covenantal context of ancient Israel. This paper argues that Reformed
theology’s use of Old Testament sacrifices to support PSA is incoherent and
selective, distorting their original meaning and misleading believers about the
nature of Christ’s death as a blood sacrifice. This misinterpretation not only
undermines the biblical coherence of PSA but also props up further theological
assertions within the doctrine that lack sound scriptural grounding.

### 

### The Diversity of Old Testament Sacrifices

The Old Testament sacrificial system, primarily outlined in Leviticus and
Exodus, encompasses a variety of offerings, each with distinct purposes and
rituals, challenging the notion that they uniformly prefigure penal
substitution. Key types include:

-   **Burnt Offerings (Olah)**: Voluntary offerings symbolizing complete
    dedication to God, consumed entirely by fire to express worship or seek
    favor.

-   **Grain Offerings (Minchah)**: Offerings of flour or bread, often
    accompanying other sacrifices, symbolizing thanksgiving or devotion.

-   **Peace Offerings (Shelamim)**: Communal meals celebrating fellowship and
    reconciliation, offered for thanksgiving, vows, or freewill.

-   **Sin Offerings (Chatat)**: Mandatory for unintentional sins, aimed at
    restoring ritual purity and communal harmony, with varying animals based on
    the offerer’s status.

-   **Guilt Offerings (Asham)**: Similar to sin offerings but tied to sins
    requiring restitution, such as theft or misuse of sacred property.

Notably, many sacrifices—burnt, grain, and peace offerings—focused on worship,
gratitude, or fellowship, not sin atonement. Even sin and guilt offerings
emphasized purification and relationship restoration over punishment
substitution. This system was deeply tied to Israel’s covenant with God,
reflecting cultural and historical contexts that do not directly translate to a
universal atonement theory like PSA. The diversity of purposes suggests that
interpreting all sacrifices as precursors to penal substitution oversimplifies
and misrepresents their roles.

### Specific Examples: Passover and the Day of Atonement

Two prominent Old Testament rituals often cited to support PSA—the Passover
sacrifice and the Day of Atonement—reveal significant discrepancies when
examined in their original contexts.

#### 

#### The Passover Sacrifice

Described in Exodus 12, the Passover involved slaughtering a lamb and applying
its blood to doorposts to protect Israelite households from the angel of death
during the exodus from Egypt. This act was about deliverance and divine
protection, not sin atonement. The blood marked God’s covenantal faithfulness,
sparing the Israelites, rather than serving as a penalty payment. While the New
Testament links Christ to the Passover lamb (e.g., 1 Corinthians 5:7), this
emphasizes liberation and redemption, not penal substitution, highlighting a
disconnect with PSA’s framework.

#### 

#### The Day of Atonement

Detailed in Leviticus 16, the Day of Atonement (Yom Kippur) is frequently cited
as a key foreshadowing of Christ’s sacrifice. The ritual involved two goats: one
sacrificed as a sin offering to purify the sanctuary from the people’s
unintentional sins, and the other, the scapegoat, sent into the wilderness
bearing the people’s iniquities. This dual process—purification through
sacrifice and sin removal via the scapegoat—does not align neatly with PSA’s
focus on punishment transfer. The sacrificed goat’s blood cleansed the holy
place, while the scapegoat, released rather than punished, symbolized sin’s
removal. PSA’s emphasis on a substitute bearing punishment finds no clear
parallel here, underscoring the ritual’s complexity beyond penal substitution.

These examples demonstrate that Old Testament sacrifices, even those related to
atonement, served varied, context-specific purposes—purification, protection,
covenant renewal—that resist reduction to PSA’s model.

### 

### The Multifaceted Symbolism of Blood

Blood in the Old Testament carries rich symbolic meanings, often misconstrued by
PSA to mean penalty payment. Leviticus 17:11 states, “For the life of a creature
is in the blood, and I have given it to you to make atonement for yourselves on
the altar; it is the blood that makes atonement for one’s life.” PSA proponents
interpret this as blood (life) required to satisfy divine justice. However, the
context suggests blood atones as a life offered to God, not necessarily as
punishment borne.

Blood’s roles included:

-   **Purification**: In priestly consecration (Exodus 29), blood sanctified
    individuals for service.

-   **Covenant Sealing**: At Sinai (Exodus 24), blood ratified the covenant
    between God and Israel.

-   **Life Representation**: Blood symbolized life dedicated to God, as in sin
    offerings.

In atonement rituals, blood cleansed from defilement and restored relationships,
not explicitly substituting punishment. This multifaceted symbolism contrasts
with PSA’s narrow focus on blood as payment for sin’s penalty, distorting its
broader biblical significance.

### Theological Implications and Incoherence

Reformed theology’s selective interpretation of Old Testament sacrifices weakens
PSA’s biblical foundation and leads to broader theological issues:

-   **God’s Wrath**: PSA depicts God as requiring punishment to satisfy wrath,
    potentially portraying Him as punitive rather than merciful (e.g., Jonah
    3:10 shows forgiveness without punishment).

-   **Atonement’s Scope**: By prioritizing penal substitution, PSA sidelines
    other biblical atonement metaphors—ransom, redemption,
    reconciliation—reducing Christ’s work to a legal transaction.

-   **Ethical Concerns**: Requiring a substitute to bear punishment raises
    questions about divine justice and love, suggesting a retributive system at
    odds with grace.

These extensions of PSA, built on a flawed sacrificial interpretation, amplify
its incoherence and potential to mislead believers.

### Counterarguments and Rebuttal

Proponents of PSA might argue that the New Testament reinterprets Old Testament
sacrifices through Christ’s death, as in Hebrews 9-10, which presents Christ as
the ultimate sacrifice. However, Hebrews emphasizes purification, access to God,
and the old system’s obsolescence, not penal substitution explicitly.
Typology—viewing Old Testament events as shadows of Christ—is another defense,
but it does not justify imposing PSA onto texts lacking such intent.
Historically, the early church embraced diverse atonement views (e.g., Christus
Victor), indicating PSA is not the sole biblical model. These counterarguments
fail to resolve the selective distortion of Old Testament contexts.

### Conclusion

Reformed theology’s reliance on Old Testament blood sacrifices to substantiate
Penal Substitutionary Atonement is fundamentally flawed. The sacrificial
system’s diversity—encompassing worship, purification, and covenant
renewal—resists reduction to penal substitution. Key rituals like Passover and
the Day of Atonement highlight purposes misaligned with PSA, while blood’s
symbolism extends beyond penalty payment. This incoherent and selective
interpretation misleads believers about Christ’s death and supports problematic
theological extensions within PSA. A faithful atonement theology must engage the
full complexity of biblical texts, embracing a richer array of atonement
metaphors beyond PSA’s narrow lens.

This completes the paper. If you’d like me to expand any section, refine
arguments, or add more examples, please prompt me to continue!
